First, thank you, my friends, for your valuable sensitivity. I'm trying to convey to you as much as I can our problems these days. 
A woman is in Turkey in the case of a subject who is kept in the background under various pretexts.In case of the "one-man hierarchy"far from freedom, women are again the most affected compared to men. At home, at work, on the street...we are oppressed, despised. In order for us to be equal to the men we do the same job with and get the same salary, we need to overturn 110 years in statistical terms. For male morality, subjects that are observed and sensitive as intimate become rude when it comes to a woman; labels and accusations always reach a functional dimension over a woman. When it comes to the concept of honor, only women come to mind, and practices are shaped against women and other oppressed masses. In society, a declared gender is expected in all areas, and non-binary people are included according to anatomical body characteristics in all cases in society, queer people are stigmatized according to their anatomical body. The traditional exploitation rules which is designed for women, also applies to queer people. Trans women are put in men's wards in prisons, raped, burned to death because they have the courage to perform themselves.  Traditional methods imposes on women to stand in the background next to men, neither in front of them nor on their sides and to walk behind them, to take charge of household chores and intimate rooms. Women's only free choice is that they can make the choice of the man they will marry-there are many exceptional cases - so they can make their social status(!) they are crushed under that situations and cannot breathe. Female and queer persons, as well as persons with anatomical male bodies, are objectified and seen as if their bodies are suitable for harassment and rape; they are not protected under any law. The oppressed segment of society-women,queers, trans people...- their moral questioning is in the hands of men and the patriarchal state. Right now, oppressed women and queer individuals are despairing. It is impossible to destroy this despair without destroying state institutions. There's no punishment for killing women.Where, if any? The dysfunctionality of the voting parties and legislatures is one of the reasons it has to be destroyed. And our rights doesn't have to be saved, our sisters will avenge us. As women become conscious and self-confident individuals, the problems I'm talking about now will disappear, because as Virginia Woolf said: We're like babies in a cradle without self-confidence. As passive as they are, we'll stay that way as long as we hope to vote. Masculine individuals who commit crimes against humanity are exonerated by taking advantage of their socially inflated opportunities and continue their lives in their usual form without being excluded in any sense. And we would rather destroy and set fire to it than see that the police, politicians, various members of the bourgeoisie are favored in the newspaper pages and in the news every day, and that the masculine mentality is recommended, so that the fire in our hearts cools a little. There will be no law that will give us our right, freedom will not distributed, it have to taken; in anger, by blood. Yes, 6284; it is abolished by the one-man administration using all kinds of manipulative ways, and the action ranks that we are fighting for otherwise are eliminated by all kinds of torture ways. But we'd rather plunder members of the masculine mindset, than believe that something will change through the law. In the geography of Turkey, on International Women's day, you can see that women's body and others were beaten, humiliated, raped by police, and the cause of all kinds of crimes committed against them is attributed to their clothing. Here we are in Turkey, and we cannot promise that the bright days will come, but the day will come when women will see their freedom taken away, and the Patriarchy, the state that prevents it, will be destroyed. This is our war, and we will not stop.
If you are not punished by a ban on entry to Turkey after the action to be taken, and if you end up in Turkey, I would be honored to welcome you to a commune where there is no betrayal. Peace be upon those who bear the fire of freedom in their hearts.

Kali Yuga
Kali Yuga
sent
2 days ago
I think it's a big problem that the birth of a boy is still considered as flattering, and  woman who hasn't given birth is as seen as lack that considered a big problem.


One of the major points of criticism is that the Convention does  define  the term \u201cgender\u201d as \u201cthe socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for women and men\u201d. \n\nSome countries considered this definition as too broad and feared it could be interpreted to make way for the allowance of a third gender. However, according to the Convention gender and sex are two separate concepts and the definition does not intend to replace the terms for \u0022women\u0022 and \u0022men\u0022. \n\nThere is no explicit mention of the terms \u0022intersex\u0022 and \u0022transgender\u0022 within the Istanbul Convention. The parties are, however, required to avoid any discrimination based on someone\u2019s gender or sexual identity, as well as their race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth, age, state of health, disability, marital status, migrant or refugee status. \n\nAnother aspect some countries are hesitant to oblige by is that the Istanbul Convention requires parties to include teaching material on non-stereotyped gender roles. This is on occasion regarded as an attempt to enforce a liberal, western lifestyle in more traditional and conservative societies - as they perceive themselves. \n\nDoes the Istanbul Convention have an actual impact? \n\nAccording to the  Parliamentary Assembly of the European Council (PACE),
