
In this essay, I will use care ethics and the work of Emmanuel Levinas to illuminate the thought of Petr Kropotkin's ethics in order to reconsider some of the principles of his thought and to reconsider what might be the way to forge a path ahead to nanrchism.  

THe primacy of individualism and anarchism.  

Individualism as the paradigm of individual selfhood.  The innovation of modernity is the resumption of the center of the world within the self.  With the "death of god", the absence of an external referent as a grounding principle upon which the self can be determinant of reality and the source of knowledge.  Once a divinity is no longer the guarantor of meaningful reality, the question comes about as to how to anchor our reality.  Early modern philosphy came about the principle that the best way to anchor the reality.  One can find in Locke the obviousness of self-belonging.  That the self is immediately itself and that its world is alrady its own property.   The immediacy of selfhood is a mystery.  

Locke answers this with the idea that the self and its property the immediacy that something belongs to oneself because it is the work of one's hands.  One is alreayd the product of one's own labor.  With Kant, we have the idea of autonomy as a self-given law, that the world exists only insofar as it the individual already has the faculties to apprehend it and can accept it as a law that comes from within itself.  

Within anarchism this is expressed most notably through the lens of Stirner's egoism, that the principle of libeartion comes from one's own selfhood and that the world is nothing to him.  Jacob Blumentfeld takes this principle as radically as possible claiming that the an external principle is always reducible to nothing and that the self as a process of appropriation and consumption.

Nihilism takes up the challenge of Stirner along with Nietzsche and others to aver that there is no grounding whatsoever but from this they conclude that nonetheless one must create one's own ground and proceed from oneself 

Such a perspective on freedom proceeds from the principle of individuality that the self is the best arbiter of freedom and that it proceeds from oneself and one's autonomy, that one's life and destiny is already driven by one's own initiatives and one's own freedom.  The arche is the self who is the first priniple that determines the world around oneself

Relational and Individual Ethics
From Carol Giligan the principle that selfhood is not the determinatvie thing but that people are already in relationships that determine one's roles iwthin the world.  The principle of ethics are not abstract principles that one already adopts as one's own but a recognition of one's situation is already one of interrelation and the thus one's ethical proceeding must operate from an understanding of this sort of interrelation.    

One finds the same sort of relationship wiithin Levinas.  THroughout his work, Levinas focuses on the question of temporal becoming.  How do we conceive of the becoming of termporality within time.  From Heidegger, he takes the idea that the past influences the future but how is this determination managed and created, how does the past influence the self.  THe self is already created through the metaphorics.  Two metaphorics which animate his thinking:  the first is that of a metabolic of the life process.  The self is a process of connection with each other and that process is the one of the birth and the rebirth, and one of consumption and production.  The problem that one is never at the origin of oneself.  THis is a sitaution in which he calls "anarchy"  that one is already created in each moement as already somehow burdened with resonsibiitlies.  Not just thrown into a stiatuion of random Being or influenced by anonymous forces but somehow alrady corelated to the influences of other people.    

The process of becoming is not the one of the anonymous forces or a field of forces but already one of human connection and human dependency.  THe phrases which Levinas uses to explore this are extreme.  The freedom which one possesses within the moment are absolute freedom , the youtht that breaks one free from the domination of essence.  Howeve,r this youht and this freedom are already made possible by the situation in which one finds oneself, a freedom which is alreayd determined by a set of dependencies and reliances 


Dependency.  
How they



Feminism teaches us that there are a variety of 


What is the axiomatic of anarchism and the way that we consider our way towards human liberation.   One way of considering anarchism is the way of the ego.  WE start this exploration not with Kropotkin but instead with a famous example from Bakhunin.  “I am truly free only when all human beings, men and women, are equally free. The freedom of other men, far from negating or limiting my freedom, is, on the contrary, its necessary premise and confirmation.”
For Bakhunin, therefore the isolated individual is not the sole part of the person's liberation but is already a contingency that requires the freedom of others.  Thus the autonomy of the self is not actually the 



Kropotkin quotes
 It is because all that is necessary for production - the
land, the mines, the highways, machinery, food, shelter, education,
knowledge - all have been seized by the few in the course of that
long story of robbery, enforced migration and wars, o

 It is because these few
prevent the remainder of men from producing the things they need,
and force them to produce, not the necessaries of life for all, but
whatever offers the greatest profits to the monopolists. In this is
the substance of all socialism

There is not even a thought, or an invention, which is not
common property, born of the past and the present. Thousands
of inventors, known and unknown, who have died in poverty, have
co-operated in the invention of each of these machines which
embody the genius of man.
who have added to the original invention these little
nothings, without which the most fertile idea would remain fruitless.
More than that: every new invention is a synthesis, the resultant
of innumerable inventions which have preceded it in the vast field
of mechanics and industry
By what right then can anyone whatever appropriate the least
morsel of this immense whole and say - This is mine, not
yours?
Everything has become private property, and he must
accept, or die of hunge
 All belongs to all. All
things are for all men, since all men have need of them, since all
men have worked in the measure of their strength to produce
them, and since it is not possible to evaluate everyone's part in
the production of the world's wealth.
 No
more of such vague formulae as 'The right to work', or 'To each
the whole result of his labour'. What we proclaim is the Right to
Well-Being: Well-Being for All

There must be expropriation. The well-being of all - the end,
expropriation - the means.
It seems to us that there is only one answer to this question: we
must recognize, and loudly proclaim, that everyone, whatever his
grade in the old society, whether strong or weak, capable or
incapable, has, before everything, the right to live, and that society
is bound to share amongst all, without exception, the means of
existence it has at its disposal. We must acknowledge this, and
proclaim it aloud, and act upon it.
We must
organize without delay a way to feed the hungry, to satisfy all
wants, to meet all needs, to produce not for the special benefit of
this one or that one, but so as to ensure to society as a whole its
life and further development.
Very different will be the result if the workers claim the right
to well-being\ In claiming that right they claim the right to take
possession of the wealth of the community - to take houses to
dwell in according to the needs of each family; to socialize the
stores of food and learn the meaning of plenty, after having known
famine too well
rudge, ruled over and exploited
by the middle class of the future. The right to well-being is the
social revolution, the right to work means nothing but the treadmill
of commercialism. It is high time for the worker to assert his right
to the common inheritance, and to enter into possession of it
Moreover, there is a tendency, though still a feeble one, to
consider the needs of the individual, irrespective of his past or
possible services to the community
 A tenth of the European population must be
compelled to sell itself in exchange for a miserable shelter and
insufficient food, and woman must consider herself a slave, in order
that millions of her sex should go through this performance every
morning.
But haird
 tide before reaching a vessel in distress -
men ready to risk their lives to save those of others - there must
be a feeling of solidarity, a spirit of sacrifice not to be bought with
galloon. It was therefore a perfectly spontaneous movement, sprung
from agreement and individual initiative. 
. One thing remains: to put the needs above the works,
and first of all to recognize the right to live, and later on the right
to well-being for all those who took their share in production
Poverty, we have said elsewhere, was the primary cause of wealth.
It was poverty that created the first capitalist; because, before
accumulating 'surplus value', of which we hear so much, men had
to be sufficiently destitute to consent to sell their labour, so as not
to die of hunger. 
If you open the works of any economist you will find that he
begins with production
Perhaps you will say this is logical. Before satisfying needs you
must create the wherewithal to satisfy them. But,
 The study of the needs of mankind, and the means of satisfying them
with the least possible waste of human energy. Its true name should
be physiology of societ
 agricultural labourer, the indus-
trial worker and so on consume less than they produce because they
are compelled to sell most of the produce of their labour and to be
satisfied with but a small portion of it.
A society that will satisfy the needs of all, and which will know
how to organize production to answer to this aim will also have
to make a clean sweep of several prejudices concerning industry,
and first of all of the theory often preached by economists - the
division of labour theory - which we are going to discuss in the
next chapter.
Political economy has often been reproached with drawing all its
deductions from the decidedly false principle, that the only incentive
capable of forcing a man to augment his power of production is
personal interest in its narrowest sense.
And yet it is certain that the day when any civilized association
of individuals would ask itself, what are the needs of all, and the means
of satisfying them, it would see that, in industry as in agriculture, it
not by submission to law, or by obedience
to any authority, but by free agreements concluded between the
various groups, territorial and professional, freely constituted for
the sake of production and consumption, as also for the satisfaction
of the infinite variety of needs and aspirations 

 in all these scenes of animal life which passed before my eyes, I saw
Mutual Aid and Mutual Support carried on to an extent which made me suspect in
it a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation
of each species, and its further evolution.

In one point only I could not entirely endorse Kessler's views. Kessler alluded
to "parental feeling" and care for progeny (see below, Chapter I) as to the source of
mutual inclinations in animals. 

 It will be only after we have
well-established the facts of mutual aid in different classes of animals, and their
importance for evolution, that we shall be able to study what belongs in the
evolution of sociable feelings, to parental feelings, and what to sociability proper -
the latter having evidently its origin at the earliest stages of the evolution of the
animal world, perhaps even at the "colony-stages." 
hich Mutual Aid would be considered, not only as an
argument in favour of a pre -human origin of moral instincts, but also as a law of
Nature and a factor of evolution

 It is the conscience - be it only at the stage of
an instinct - of human solidarity. It is the unconscious recognition of the force that
is borrowed by each person from the practice of mutual aid; of the close
dependency of every one's happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense of
4
justice, or equity, which brings the individua l to consider the rights of every other
individual as equal to his own.


 In
the history of mankind, individual self-assertion has often been, and continually is,
something quite different from, and far larger and deeper than, the petty,
unintelligent narrow-mindedness, which, with a large class of writers, goes for
"individualism" and "self -assertion." N

He pointed out how, in numberless animal societies, the struggle between separate
individuals for the means of existence disappears, how STRUGGLE is replaced by CO-
OPERATION, and how that substitution results in the development of inte llectu al
and moral faculties which secure to the species the best conditions for survival. He
intimated that in such cases the fittest are not the physically strongest, nor the
cunningest, but those who learn to combine so as mutually to support each other,
strong and weak alike, for the welfare of the community. 

 or perhaps even more, of mutual support, mutual aid, and
mutual defence amidst animals belonging to the same species or, at least, to the
same society. Sociability is as much a law of nature as mutual struggle . 

However, associations which do not extend beyond the family bonds are of
relatively small importance in our case, the more so as we know numbers of
associations for more general purposes, such as hunting, mutual protection, and
even simple enjoyment of life

As seen from the above, the war of each against all is not THE law of nature.
Mutual aid is as much a law of nature as mutual struggle, and that law will become
24
still more apparent when we have analyzed some other associations of birds and
those of the mammalia. 

Thus it is not imposed, as is the case with ants and bees, by the very
physiological structure of the individuals; it is cultivated for the benefits of mutual
aid, or for the sake of its pleasures.
Sociability - that is, the need of the animal of associating with its like - the
love of society for society's sake, combined with the "joy of life," only now begins
to receive due attention from the zoologists. 

 The high development of parental love in all
classes of animals, even with lions and tigers, is generally known. As to the young
birds and mammals whom we continually see associating, sympathy - not love -
attains a further development in their associations. 

"Therefore combine - practise mutual aid!
That is the surest means for giving to each and to all the greatest safety, the best
guarantee of existence and progress, bodily, intellectual, and moral."

Hobbes took that position; and while some of his eighteenth -century followers
endeavoured to prove that at no epoch of its existence - not even in its most
primitive condition - mankind lived in a state of perpetual warfare; that humans
have been sociable even in "the state of nature,"

The very persistence of the clan
organization shows how utterly false it is to represent primitive mankind as a
disorderly agglomeration of individuals, who only obey their individual passions,
and take advantage of their personal force and cunningness against all other
representatives of the species. Unbridled individualism is a modern growth, but it
is not characteristic of primitive mankind . 7

"The feeling of friendship is known among them; it is strong. Weak people are
usually supported; sick people are very well attended to; they never are abandoned
or killed. These tribes are cannibals, but they very seldom eat members of their own
tribe (when immolated on religious principles, I suppose); they eat strangers only.

"The Commune," Guilbert de Nogent wrote, "is an oath of mutual aid (MUTUI
ADJUTORII CONJURATIO). Through it the serfs (CAPITE SENST) are freed from all
serfdom; through it, they can only be condemned to a legall y determined fine for
breaches of the law; through it, they cease to be liable to payments which the serfs
always used to pay." 196

But as the
value of land was increasing, in consequence of the growth of industries, and the
nobility had acquired, under the State organization, a power which it never had
had under the feudal system, it took possession of the best parts of the communal
lands, and did its best to destroy the communal institutions.

But when we pass from public life to the private life of the modern
individuat we discover another extremely wide world of mutual aid and support
which only passes unnoticed by most sociologists because it is limited to the
narrow circle of the family and personal friendship. 

For every one who has any idea of the life of the labouring classes it is evident
that without mutual aid being practised among them on a large scale they never
could pull through all their difficulties. I

In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of species live in
societies, and that the y find in association the best arms for the struggle for life:
understood, of course, in its wide Darwinian sense - not as a struggle for the sheer
means of existence, but as a struggle against all natural conditions unfavourable to
the species. The animal species, in which individual struggle has been reduced to
its narrowest limits, and the practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest
development, are invariably the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the
most open to further progress . The mutual protection which is obtained in this case,
the possibility of attaining old age and of accumulating experience, the higher
intellectual development, and the further growth of sociable habits, secure the
maintenance of the species, its extension, and its further progressive evolution. The
unsociable species, on the contrary, are doomed to decay .

And finally, in the last two chapters facts were produced to show that although
the growth of the State on the pattern of Imperial Rome had put a violent end to all
medieval institutions for mutual support, this new aspect of civilization could not
last. The State, based upon loose aggregations of individuals and undertaking to be
their only bond of union, did not answer its purpose. T

It will probably be remarked that mutual aid, even though it may represent
one of the factors of evolution, covers nevertheless one aspect only of human
relations; that by the side of this current, powerful though it may be, there is, and
always has been, the other current - the self-assertion of the individual, not only in
its efforts to attain personal or caste superiority, economical, political, and spiritua l,
but also in its much more important although less evident function of breaking
through the bonds, always prone to become crystallized, which the tribe, the village
community, the city, and the State impose upon the individual. In o

escription of the
ways and means by which theocracy, military power, autocracy, and, later on, the
richer classes' rule have been promoted, established, and maintained. The struggles
between these forces make, in fact, the substance of history. We may thus take the
knowledge of the individual factor in human history as granted - even though
there is full room for a new study of the subject on the lines just alluded to; while,
on the other side, the mutual -aid factor has been hitherto totally lost sight of; it was
simply denied, or even scoffed at, by the writers of the present and past generation .
It was therefore necessary to show, first of all, the immense part which this factor
plays in the evolution of both the animal world and human societies. On

But we see also that the practice of mutual aid
and its successive developments have created the very conditions of society life in
which humanity was enabled to develop our arts, knowledge, and intelligence; and
that the periods when institutions based on the mutual-aid tendency took their
greatest development were also the periods of the greatest progress in arts

However, it is especially in the domain of ethics that. the dominating
importance of the mutual-aid principle appears in full. That mutual aid is the real
foundation of our ethical conceptions seems evident enough. But whatever the
opinions as to the first origin of the mutual -aid feeling or instinct may be whether a
biological or a supernatural cause is ascribed to it -we must trace its existence as
far back as to the lowest stages of the animal world; and from these stages we can
follow its uninterrupted evolution, in opposition to a number of contrary agencies,
through all degrees of human development, up to the present times.



“Although they exist in history, these societies seem to have worked out or retained a certain wisdom which makes them desperately resist any structural modification which might afford history a point of entry into their lives. The societies which have best protected their distinctive character appear to be those concerned above all with persevering in their existence.”

Persevering in one’s existence is the particular quality of the organism; it is not a progress towards achievement, followed by stasis, which is the machine’s mode, but an interactive, rhythmic, and unstable process, which constitutes an end in itself.


Levinas
an ejaculation into time TI
a birthing into time OTB
