

carey

ce new worlds together differently. Here the intent is to interpret care-
work and care-giving broadly. Then focus on creating movements that address these experiences
and realities generally and the need for creating practical and political initiatives that struggle
against current conditions and limitations and toward new, liberatory paradigms of care.3

ditionally male enclave, it was to find for
us a new level of exploita- tion. [...] The challenge to the women’s movement is
to find modes of struggle, which, while they liberat

. Emma Goldman was arrested twice simply for
distributing information about birth control; anarchist schools, cooperatives, and ethnic organi-
zations provided direct services and bases of support

va (active in the mid-2000’s, loosely translating as “precarious women
workers adrift”) proposed a “caring strike.” Hence, what would a care-work strike look like and
how do we strike against the imposition of care-work without striking against those we are
caring for?

4 Additionally, the activist subculture is predicated on
the escape from the restraints of the family, housework, and reproductive labor. When being
active, as discussed previously, is limited to those who are able-bodied, able-minded, and able to
avoid the imposition of care-work, what results is a particularly white, middle-class and young
movement. This is connected to larger issues addressed herein, and stated perfectly during the
debates of a decade ago: “D

. This movement-plus-care scenario ignores the fact that care and support are
already taking place in society. Seeing care as a separate activity to be performed in movements,
outside of the function of everyday life, increases the distance between radical movements and
the populations they purport to be bringing into a revolutionary momen

nary gender, and working in the care and medical indus-
tries our movements deepen our relationships with one another and construct new fronts for
revolutionary struggle. I

What already conditions our becoming and how is it possible for us to become at all.  What expense do we have when are created as individuals.
What role do we perform in the nurturance of ourselves and as the other.

The question of subjectivity as freedom

The idea of society itself as a general feeling of communal togetherness but rather the bonds of intimacy that bind us together and that condition the possibilit for our existence
In the generation
The sui generis is a moment of this process. The self assertion of the self is a moment in which we say that we are the architects of our own destiny and the possibility of our own future.
but what if our own creation is already a moment of dependency and our creation
WE can certainly assume this moment of dependence as if it were our own and claim it as our own foundation.

The generality of the social and generality of being

Human connection of the reliance on our own 
What Kropotkin points out is not our own autonomy but rahter a moement of heteronomy, the fact that we are already reliant on others to be able to consturct our own possibilities as individuals
WE are caught up in a cycle of dependence not just of the anonymous forces of being or the molecular forces but already on other people who have nurtured us and made it possible for us to exist as such

We perform labor that is nurturing or destructive to ohters  
WE produce things that
Our own lives are expressions of self externalization 
These things are not immediately convertible to our own selves but already expressions within a world given unto others that depend upon the apprehension and reception by other people
We produce this as possibilites for the nurturance of other people


connection across generations both to the past and to the future

The subjectivity is not at the origin of itself.  It is always subjected to influences and persons
This is expressed as an antihumanist way as the way in which we are alreayd dependent an d
