Kropotkin as Maternal:  Anarchism as a Practice of Care

Let us begin this remembrance of Kropotkin through a practice of listening, turning our ears and eyes to the memory of his longtime comrade Errico Malatesta.  Before his "Recollections and Criticisms of an Old Friend" can even begin to ennumerate any criticism of Kropotkin's rationalizations, he is already compelled to recount the fundamental generosity of Within his Before he can even begin to enunciate any criticisms of the types of rational and deductive, mechanistic and biological, he is already compelled to attest to the affective practice of his longtime friend.  He states:

I remember what he did in Geneva in the winter of 1879 to help a group of Italian refugees in dire straits, among them myself; I remember the small attentions, I would call maternal, which he bestowed on me when one night in London having been the victim of an accident I went and knocked on his door; I recall the innumerable kind actions towards all sorts of people; I remember the cordial atmosphere with which he was surrounded.


What does this mean here that Kropotkin "small attentions, I would call maternal" . A process of being affectied.  The small attentions maternal.  A process of awareness, an attunement to a sympathy of human connection.   That the other person is always making demands .  an awareness of the trauma of others, the dependency of another person.  Demands of the other person on you but not one of enslavement.   You have the freedom to respond or not respond but one is still awareness of them.  But the maternal is perhaps a deeper elementary ness of it.  WHat is the problematic of generation itself.  The mother who is not just a form of care but actually the substantiality of the substance of life.  Materiality of life is connected through dependence, instantiated as needs.  What are the various forms of relating through these affective bonds?  

ONe of the most fundamental principles that we are born into the world, that we are create throguh the world of flesh into the world.  We belong to a specis   The only way that we have been able to sustan ourselves is through the maintenance of the connections that we have with each other through mutual aid.  



The idea that we are born is somehow so self evident as to be laughable and ignorant and obvous but the fact is that it isn't entirely obvious to the principle of political theory .  The typical masculinist paradigm is one of no origin, deracinated from individuality, set upon the world's stage. In this vulnerablity one is exposed to exploitation.   The Hobbes takes as a state of nature that poses a primary state of nature in which all are opposed to all, requiring the imposintion of a state form to prevent the conflict inwhich we are involved.

" Let us return again to the state of nature, and consider men as if but even now sprung out of the earth, and suddainly (like Mushromes) come to full maturity without all kind of engagement to each other:" Magical birhting from the soil, only indiviidaully realated to itself but not to anything beyond it, avoiding the processes of birth and of generation.  This is in a chapter explaining the genesis of the relationships between servants and lords, about an expression of selfhood is an assertion of will.  " We doe not therefore by nature
seek Society for its own sake, but that we may receive some Honour or Profit from it" Peopel act out of will the will to dominate. Voluntary agreements mitigate this original violence such that they agree to subject their own wills to antoher person as a conditon and contract of their own freedom. A relationship with death and violence.  The soil is not the place of decay as well as birth.. distinugishes man from beast because man prefers to contest for honor and preferment, a fundmanetal poswer over otherse, more than what other people possess, the right aquired over others.  thhe parental is a power over the child an absolute power and the individualtion of the child is only a matter of overcoming this first role of domnation, parental maternal and paternal to acheive one's own freedom


So why don't we instead turn to femiist theorists to attempt to understand what we mean by maternal attentions.  THe best way we can look at this is through investigation of a feminsist theorists.   Patricia Glazebook writes on birthing " Rather, it entails the fullness of genesis, birth. Architecture is matrix (Arakawa and Gins 35, 40). The ori­
ginal architectural site—the first place—is the womb. Aristotle argued that place cannot be a body, because if it
were, two bodies would be in the same place at the same time (209a7). Impossible, he says. Clearly, Aristotle
was never pregnant. Pregnancy is a rounding logic of self into other, a reconciling spiral of unity and plurality
in possibility. As mother/matrix grows to become an other, who in turn has the potential to become a parent, a
circle o f continuity is traced."  The presence of the one in the self.   The womb is not a passive receptacle, but
the original landing-site of architectural body, the first place with which the body finds itself co-structuring. It
is not inert, but living and growing. Giving birth is not building a baby. Pregnancy is not an art, but a natural
process Gestation is an
architectural process, the arch-process that culminates in birth, the original fixing of consciousness into self,
into “organism-person.” Selfhood is not subjectivity, separated from the objects of consciousness, but contex­
tualized process and integration, synthesis and co-growth—in short, life 

Ruddick on maternal relations
=============================
RUddick defines maternal realationship as a practice of maternal work.  THe work is a form of relationship which subverts the normal category of relationshiping and the instinct to formulate all realationships in terms of dominance and submission.  TShe explains that 
"These three demands — for preservation, growth, and social accept­
ability — constitute maternal work; to be a mother is to be com­
mitted to meeting these demands by works o f preservative love,
nurturance, and training.
Conceptually and historically, the preeminent o f these demands
is that o f preservation. As a species, human children share pro­
longed physical fragility and therefore prolonged dependence on
adults for their safety and well-being. In all societies, children need
protective care, though the causes and types o f fragility and the
means o f protection vary widely. This universal need o f human
children creates and defines a category o f human work. "  
Not an acutal physical obligatoin but an ethical one.  Not based on certain principles htat are undeniable materially.  it is an affection but not an affection by an emotion but rather an affection by a certain type of responsibility.  
" To be committed to meeting children’s
demand for preservation does not require enthusiasm or even love;
it simply means to see vulnerability and to respond to it with care
rather than abuse, indifference, or flight. Preserving the lives o f
children is the central constitutive, invariant aim o f maternal prac­
tice; the commitment to achieving that aim is the constitutive
maternal act
"  Not a virtuatous characteristic but the apprehension that there is an ethical demand being made upon them.   What they share is not virtuous
characteristics but rather an identification and a discourse about
the strengths required by their ongoing commitments to protect,
nurture, and train

I add that the point about gender difference is not that women are mothers but that
everyone is born from a mother, regardless of who raises them. Being a woman does not mean
you are, will be, or want to be a mother. But being a person means someone cared for you. The
mothering role need not, and in fact does not, belong to women alone. So ‘mother’ and
‘mothering’ do not need to abandoned as words, but they do need to be disconnected from
women. Aft

Capital tells us that the meaning of
life is the individual accumulation of private wealth, while women’s logic of care aims at
meeting daily needs and thriving for children and other family, farm animals, the land, and
ecosystems, without which they cannot survive (Glazebrook and Opoku 2020)

ro m Shiva, that the global North has been shaped by a history of gendered logics of
exploitation that turn ‘sources of regeneration and renewal of life.. .into inert and fragmented
matter, mere “raw material” to be processed into a finished product,’ though nature is in reality
cyclical, regenerative process (Mies and Shiva 1993).
. I do not suggest that women care because of inherent drive or emotional sensitivity, both
of which are used to denigrate women as weak and irrational. Rather, as a neo-Marxist, I mean
by ‘care’ women’s labor practices  

 The dependency critique hones in on one
particular feature of women’s difference, her historically assigned role as
caregiver of dependents. The difference is contingent. 

Dependency and Eva Kittay
========================
The kind of dependency as a mode of relationship and appreciating its formative influence in every moment of existence.   As a principle of existenc,e Hannah Arendt 

work as value and valuation
aristotle activity 
that appears as various aspects of exploited labor under capitalist social realations.  

Women’s differences from men, both physiological
and cultural, are the basis of the difference critique. The difference—not
in properties possessed, but in hierarchy and power—constitutes the
basis for the dominance critique. A third critical approach sees both gen­
der equality and its feminist critics ignoring the importance of race,
class, and other differences in shaping the leading ideals of justice for
women. 1 have called it the diversity critique. The final critique that I
discuss, the dependency critique, forms the basis of this book

First, the conception of society as an association of equals masks the,
inevitable dependencies and asymmetries that form part of the human
condition—those of children, the aging anil the ailing—dependencies
that often mark the closest human ties

care work as dependency work
Both the older Eldora Mitchell and the younger Martha Perry have
spent their lives doing what 1 cali dependency work, the work of caring
for those who are inevitably dependent.

The dependency critique is a feminist critique of equality that asserts:
A conception of society viewed as an association of equals masks
inequitable dependencies, those of infancy and childhood, old age, ill­
ness and disability. While we are dependent, we are not well positioned
to enter a competition for the goods of social cooperation on equal
terms


My point is that this interdependence begins with dependence, It
begins with the dependency of an infant, and often ends with the depen­
dency of a very ill or frail person close ro dying. 

Interdependence is based on dependence:  the buddhist idea of dependant-coorirignation, each origin is already dependant on other things and therefore is not complete in itself.  Dependency is a fundamental fact taken from the first noble truth that all things suffer, all things are passive 

 By excluding this dependency from social and political concerns,
we have been able to fashion the pretense that we are independent—that
the cooperation between persons that some insist is /ufmiependenee is
simply the mutual (often voluntary) cooperation between essentially
independent persons  voluntarism  

Dependents require cave. Neither the utterly helpless newborn who
must he cured for in nil aspects of her life nor a frail, but functioning,
elderly person who needs only assistance to carry on with her life, will
survive or thrive without another who meets her basic needs. 

 Questions of who takes on the responsibility of care,
who does the hands-on care, who sees to it that the caring is done and
done well, and who provides the support for the relationship of care and
for both parties to the caring relationship— these are social and political
questions. 

 I engage in a constructive philosophical project to
establish the moral significance of dependency and its care, that is, the
labor associated with it that I call t/tprndtnry work.


The dependency critique considers, then, the inescapable fact of human
dependency and the ways in which such labor makes one vulnerable to
domination.

There is a transformative potential here.
To incorporate the needs and values which women have attended to,
requires a transformation making equality truly inclusive. In the follow­
ing chapter, 1 suggest that such a concept is adumbrated in the adage that
“we are all some mother’s child.”
 She is the child of a mother only because another person is
(or was) someone who mothered her.

A family with children is not an egalitarian arrangement but a
mutual-support society where all the members, children and father
as well as mother, depend upon one another for emotional support
and physical protection front the outside world.

These would form the basis of a connection-based equality rather
than the individual-based equality more familiar to us. The question for a
connection-based equality is not: What rights are due me by virtue of my
status as an equal, such that these rights are consistent with those of all
other individuals who have the status of an equal? Instead, the question
is: What are my responsibilities to others with whom I stand in specific
relations and what are the responsibilities of others to me, so that I can
be well cared for and have my needs addressed even as I care for and
respond to the needs of those who depend on me?
the needs of the ill or disabled and the frail elderly as well as
the young. Many moral theories can be and have been used to justify
such moral obligations of both society as a whole and of particular indi­
viduals, but the obligations owed to those whose who give care, who
attend to dependency, has not figured in moral, political or judicial dis­
cussions.

Our dependency, then, is not only an exceptional circumstance. To
view it as such reflects an outlook that dismisses the importance of
human interconnectedness, nor only for purposes of survival, but for
the development of culture itself. 

 dependency w ork.
Although we sometimes speak of dependency care, 1 have chosen th e
word work to emphasize that care of dependents is work.

It is the work of tending to
others in their state of vulnerability— care. The labor either sustains ties
among intimates or itself creates intimacy and trust— connection. And
affectional ties— concern—generally sustain the connection, even when
the work involves an economic exchange 
 While dependency work can be variously distributed and
shared, as long as an individual is responsible for the care of another
who is dependent on her, I call that person a dependency worker.

Maternal practice, as described by Sara Ruddick, provides a paradig­
matic instance of dependency work. Ruddick identifies three features of
maternal practice: preservative love, fostering growth, and training for
social acceptance
Different practices, then, differentially shape demands on the depen­
dency worker.
It is useful to distinguish between the inequality o f power in a relation
of dependency and the exertion of domination in a relation of inequality.
Characterizing domination in terms
of the abusive power the dominator wields, Sara Ruddick writes, “M eta­
phorically, a dominator treats the dominated as if she were an “object o f
property.”
 The inequality between worker and
charge is one of capacity, although it may also be one of social status
and even of power over life and death.

. It often seems that to infuse caring labor
into such a relationship (or a contact with another that is not yet a rela­
tionship) relaxes our own boundaries of self, which makes way for an
emotional bond that is especially potent.
merging of affectivities

Dependency work is lab o r
that enhances the power and activity of another. It is work that caters t o
the needs of another. 

t, the dependency
worker is exceedingly vulnerable to exploitation, to domination by the
one upon whom she depends for support. The

y. As
long as the dependency worker must rely on a provider to meet: l) her
own needs; 2) the needs of her charge (which in the self-understanding
of the dependency worker gets taken up as—even as they stand in ten­
sion with—her own needs); and 3) the resources required to sustain the
dependency relation, the bargaining position of the dependency worker
will be worse than that of the provider

elves to the dependency worker, as she exten d s
herself to her charge. The moral features of dependency work, th en ,
include both the moral responsibilities of the dependency worker to h e r
charge, and the moral obligation of those who stand mirside of th e
dependency relation to support such a relation.

Ties of affection and
concern bind dependency worker and her charge. The ties are not
between gcneralizable others, but between non-fungible concrete oth­
ers.104 The relations and moral obligations between the parties are not
the general obligations we bear to another person, whoever they may be,
but special relations. In the case of special relations, we have obligations
that are particular to the individual in that relationship

—but mu of a relationship between
one in need and one who is situated to meet the need.101

Contrary to the voluntarist, however, voluntarily undertaken
obligations are not the only source of obligations in relationships.

wc needed to evoke a conception of
justice—a justice that pertains to how “the existing allocation of respon­
sibilities itself” came to be. 


 It is the equality which is based upon the recognition of each p e r ­
son’s individuality and independence—each one’s own conception o f
 (
one’s own good—and the individually held rights and powers
If we start not with individuals in their separateness, hut in their c o n ­
nectedness, we can read their demands for equality through these c o n ­
nections. If we can sec each individual nested within relationships o f
care, we can envision relationships that embrace the needs of each. T h i s
leads us to an alternative understanding of equality.

violates  an exchange reciprocity.

Connection-based equality yields a nested set of reciprocal re la ­
tions and obligations. It is the social cooperation that depends on th e se
nested relationships and obligations that I call dotdia—

 No one can survive and become a member of the human commu­
nity without the interest of some mothering pcrson(s) who has provided
a degree of n preservative love, a concern in fostering the individual’s
growth, and a training for social accep tability


Maternal practice—providing for children—requires that we provide
caring institutions while recognizing that the work itself often dem ands
Vulnerability :\iul the Moral Nature of Dependency Relations / 71
the commitment of a self transparent to the needs of the charge. The
recognition of equality inherent in the understanding that we all are some
mother’s child—or connection-based equality—has implications for
responses appropriate to the requirements of dependency work. 


What is interesting in the family not voluntary  cain and abel " am i my brother's keeper; all of the tales of greek trgedy and much of shakespeare 

affection  being affected by



9 Previously, 1 have delineated
a number of features that in the lesser forms of dependency are separa­
ble, but in utter dependency are inexorably linked. First, the dependent
requires care and c a r in g p e r s o n s to n icer fu n d a m e n ta l n e e d s f o r survival
and basic thriving. Second, while in the condition of dependency, the
dependent is unable to reciprocate the benefits received


Doula originally meant slave or servant in Greek. It is intriguing to
redirect the concept and signify instead a caregiver who cares for those
who care for others. Rather than the notion of a servant fulfilling the
function of a doula, we need a concept of interdependence that recog­
nizes a relation—not precisely of reciprocity but of nested dependen­
cies—linking those who help and those who require help to give aid to
those who cannot help themselves. Extending the notion of the service
performed by the doula, let us use the term doulia for an arrangement by
which service is passed on so that those who become needy by virtue of
tending to those in need can be cared for as we

*** A principle of doulia would
mandate: first, a social responsibility (derived from political justice
realized in social cooperation) for enabling dependency relations satis­
factory to dependency worker and dependent alike; and second, social
institutions that foster an attitude of caring and a respect for care by
enabling caregivers to do the job of caretaking without becoming disad­
vantaged in the competition for the benefits of social cooperation.


*** The principle of the social responsibility for
care would read something like: To each according to his or her need for
care, from each according to his or her capacity for care, and such support
from social institutions as to make available resources and opportunities
to those providing care, so that all will he adequately attended in relations
that are sustaining.

***  With this in mind, let us have
another look at the “goods” pertinent to dependency relationships: 1) the
understanding that we will be cared for if wc become dependent; 2) the
support we require if we have to take on the work of caring for a depen­
dent; and 3) the assurance that if we become dependent, someone will
take on the job of caring for those who arc dependent upon us. Instead o f
being thought of as “goods,” these desiderata may just as well be thought
of as “capabilities.”

ng. This is the concept of doulia, the
concept of social cooperation that derives front the Greek word for
service: Ju st as we have required care to survive and thrive, so we need
to provide conditions that allow others—including those who do the
work o f caring— to receive the care they need to survive and thrive.

R uddick has identified three requirements of maternal work: preserving
the life o f a child, socializing her for acceptance, and fostering her devel­
opm ent

If it were, then this capability equality would be just
another form of individual-based equality. (See Chapter One, pages
28—29.) If capability equality is to be a connection-based equality then
there must also be a consideration of how the maintenance of the rela­
tionships of dependency can be sustained and how the functioning spaces
are to be coordinated.


 Clearly Sesha is not “prepared to com­
promise” in the requisite ways for a mutual equal relationship, yet it
does make sense for me to relinquish a portion of my autonomy. 

What does the word "mutual" mean in "mutual aid" how is it different from mutualism?

 both receiving
and giving care are understood to be essential goods, as fundamental
and irreducible as political liberty and economic well-being. 

 Perhaps
we should not be surprised that the very possibility of conceiving o f
society as an association of equals has been predicated on dependencies
which stand outside of the domain of equals. The very young are equals-
to-bc-once-thcy-reach-majority— not yet equals. T

 If equality is to become a
reality in the face of dependency and the demands of dependency care,
then it must be a c o n n e c tio n - b a s e d equality, an equality that recognizes
needs based on our functioning through periods of dependency and car­
ing for dependents. A connection-based equality is one concerned less
w ith resources as such and more with capabilities and functionings. Such
a connection-based equality, I have been able only to adumbrat

. If we begin training for dependency work early— in school perhaps,
concentrating on accustoming young boys, as well as young girls, to take
on dependency work— will there be new resistances to degendering this
labor that we cannot now envision?


 This book demolishes those dualisms, and especially the
primordial ones that place ‘humanity over and above nature’ and ‘men over and
above women’. 

 Salleh sees the
care-giving labour of marginalised women, subsistence farmers, fishers and
gatherers as the creation and practice of an alternative ontology and
epistemology in humanity-nature relations. Th


As was the case twenty years ago,
Ecofeminism as Politics appears now in 2017 as a beacon of hope reaffirming
and, indeed, expanding the vision of a politics and ethos of care. We will need
this transformative vision more than ever over the next twenty years, if our
children and beleaguered Earth are to be saved.

Western dualisms in the distinction between a
feminine, embodied, reproductive realm of necessity, and a masculine, creative,
productive realm of freedom. She notes the blindness of many left radicals to the
masculinist instrumentalism inherent in the preoccupation with production and
exchange value, and the neglect for nature’s intrinsic or ‘metabolic value


death and rebirth

voluntary assent to what is involuntary already the fact of being born and dependent and enedy 

the correlation of what we are voluntary to understand and appreciate what we are involtarily


geerativeity of generosity 


“If we have been able to educate ourselves and develop our faculties; if we have access to intellectual satisfactions and live in not too bad material circumstances, it is because we have benefited, through and accident of rebirth, by the exploitation to which the workers are subjected; and therefore the struggle for the emancipation of the workers is a duty, a debt which we must repay.”



The 
THe central quesiton of sociaism
"""
 It is because these few
prevent the remainder of men from producing the things they need,
and force them to produce, not the necessaries of life for all, but
whatever offers the greatest profits to the monopolists. In this is
the substance of all socialism
"""

"force" "produce"
"profit"
"consumption""need" "substance" 

A created world
"There is not even a thought, or an invention, which is not common property, born of the past and the present. Thousands of inventors, known and unknown, who have died in poverty, have co-operated in the invention of each of these machines which
embody the genius of man. who have added to the original invention these little nothings, without which the most fertile idea would remain fruitless.
More than that: every new invention is a synthesis, the resultant of innumerable inventions which have preceded it in the vast field of mechanics and industry By what right then can anyone whatever appropriate the least morsel of this immense whole and say - This is mine, not yours?

human being the uniqueness of history is the material culture. natural of the world in which we inhabit is the genealogy of the world in which we exist.  the materiality of the matter.  


Thinking through Kropotkin through a maternal lens, employing the ideas of maternal thoery to think through some implications of his thorught


We must organize without delay a way to feed the hungry, to satisfy all wants, to meet all needs, to produce not for the special benefit of this one or that one, but so as to ensure to society as a whole its life and further development. Very different will be the result if the workers claim the right
to well-being

The right to well-being is the
social revolution, the right to work means nothing but the treadmill
of commercialism.
One thing remains: to put the needs above the works,
and first of all to recognize the right to live, and later on the right
to well-being for all those who took their share in production

Before satisfying needs you
must create the wherewithal to satisfy them. But,
 The study of the needs of mankind, and the means of satisfying them
with the least possible waste of human energy. Its true name should
be physiology of societ

A society that will satisfy the needs of all, and which will know
how to organize production to answer to this aim will also have
to make a clean sweep of several prejudices concerning industry,

but by free agreements concluded between the
various groups, territorial and professional, freely constituted for
the sake of production and consumption, as also for the satisfaction
of the infinite variety of needs and aspirations 

the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation
of each species, and its further evolution.


borrowed dependency 

but those who learn to combine so as mutually to support each other,
strong and weak alike, for the welfare of the community. 

 It is the conscience - be it only at the stage of
an instinct - of human solidarity. It is the unconscious recognition of the force that
is borrowed by each person from the practice of mutual aid; of the close
dependency of every one's happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense of
4
justice, or equity, which brings the individua l to consider the rights of every other
individual as equal to his own.


 Unbridled individualism is a modern growth, but it
is not characteristic of primitive mankind . 7

I need not dwell upon the associations of male and female for rearing their
offspring, for providing it with food during their first steps in life, or for hunting in
common; though it may be mentioned by the way that such associations are the
18
rule even with the least sociable carnivores and rapacious birds; and that they
derive a special interest from being the field upon which tenderer feelings develop
even amidst otherwise most cruel animals.


es, foxes, and several birds of prey may be quoted as instances in point.
However, associations which do not extend beyond the family bonds are of
relatively small importance in our case, the more so as we know numbers of
associations for more general purposes, such as hunting, mutual protection, and
even simple enjoyment of life


it took possession of the best parts of the communal
lands, and did its best to destroy the communal institutions.

 extremely wide world of mutual aid and support
which only passes unnoticed by most sociologists because it is limited to the
narrow circle of the family and personal friendship
Start with the example of Malatesta and Kropotkin\

maternal and materiality.  so here we think a few major factors that are intresting about materiality and maternality

so obvious and so often overlooked 


These three demands — for preservation, growth, and social accept­
ability — constitute maternal work; to be a mother is to be com­
mitted to meeting these demands by works o f preservative love,
nurturance, and training.
Ruddick 17
Conceptually and historically, the preeminent o f these demands
is that o f preservation. As a species, human children share pro­
longed physical fragility and therefore prolonged dependence on
adults for their safety and well-being. In all societies, children need
protective care, though the causes and types o f fragility and the
means o f protection vary widely. This universal need o f human
children creates and defines a category o f human work. 

 To be committed to meeting children’s
demand for preservation does not require enthusiasm or even love;
it simply means to see vulnerability and to respond to it with care
rather than abuse, indifference, or flight. Preserving the lives o f
children is the central constitutive, invariant aim o f maternal prac­
tice; the commitment to achieving that aim is the constitutive
maternal act

What they share is not virtuous
characteristics but rather an identification and a discourse about
the strengths required by their ongoing commitments to protect,
nurture, and train

the embodiment of the body

How are these two definitions of the home, as the sphere of domination and as the sphere of need, related to each other? Hannah Arendt collapses these two definitions, arguing that the vulnerability of bodily need is our primordial experience of being dominated, and that our need to dominate the needs that dominate us is the reason why we need to elaborate structures of hierarchical political domination (1998, p. 31). Arendt’s correlation of dependency with domination is one of the most problematic and most characteristic aspects of patriarchal thinking. This repudiation of dependency becomes so absurd that many patriarchal thinkers even conceal the fact that we are born unto women. Thomas Hobbes, for example, inaugurates the modern conception of citizenship by comparing political subjects with mushrooms that spring out of the ground fully formed, emerging as isolated individuals who can freely establish contracts and submit to rulers (1998, p. 205).

Are there not different ways of understanding the vulnerability experienced in individual and social life? Can we not embrace a non-patriarchal vision of the home as a site for the enactment of responsibility for the needs of ourselves and other people, as a place for caring, refuge and hospitality; as a model for empathetic sociality? Could the affirmation of such social nurturance not subvert the hierarchical and antagonistic logic of the political?

Maternal Nurturance as a Model for Care
In order to consider these alternatives, it is useful to return to the critical interventions of feminist ethics. These analyses are interesting not because they posit an essence of ‘the feminine’, but rather because they have engendered a fecund critique of the patriarchal system. According to Nancy Hartsock, the dominant powers in any society promulgate an understanding of social relations that is both partial and perverse, an ideology that not only perpetuates social inequity but also denies the true nature of social life (1983, pp. 287–8). Hartsock argues that a feminist standpoint arises not out of any essential female difference, but rather because women have tended to occupy social roles involving material sustenance and support, and this proximity to materiality allows them to understand how much our everyday lives depend upon the satisfaction of material needs (1983, pp. 291ff). Influenced by Hartsock, Sara Ruddick explains that:

care workers depend on a practical knowledge of the qualities of the material world, including the human bodily world, in which they deal. This means that the material world, seen under the aspect of caring labor, is organized in terms of people’s needs and pleasures and, by extension, of the needs and pleasures of any animal or plant that is instrumental in human caring or is tended for its own sake. (Ruddick, 2006, p. 130)

Ruddick’s research into caring labour is carried out though an investigation of maternal thinking. She defines maternal thinking as the pattern of cognition that emerges out of the practice of mothering, a set of attunements women acquire as they become responsible for meeting the demands of a child. The child confronts the mother as a completely helpless being, one who is totally dependent upon her for the satisfaction of all its most basic needs. The activity of mothering requires that the mother – who according to Ruddick can be of any gender (2006, pp. 40ff) – respond to the material reality of this human vulnerability in a way that does not enforce power relations. Even the weakest mother can overwhelm the fragility of a dependent child, but domination is not what defines the activity of mothering. Instead of establishing rigid control over the child, Ruddick recommends what she terms ‘holding’ as the best way to preserve its fragility, a practice that maintains safety of the child, promotes its strength, and allows it to flourish without establishing any ownership over it (2006, pp. 78–9). In addition to reconsidering the importance of maternal care, other feminist thinkers have similarly re-evaluated the category of domestic nurturance. For example, bell hooks discusses how black women maintained what she calls ‘home place’ as a site of resistance against rampant racism, a refuge where people could gather and heal themselves from the wounds inflicted by a hostile society (2001, pp. 41–9).

Many contemporary anarcha-feminists avoid themes such as mothering and the household out of a desire to avoid gender essentialism. However, we do read anarcha-feminist authors arguing that traditionally feminine concerns such as domestic labour, sexuality and child rearing should not be treated as mere addendums to the anarchist project, but must be central to our vision of an anarchist society. This attitude was expressed most strongly in an early essay by Roxanne Dunbar in which she argued:

If the maternal traits conditioned into women are desirable traits, they are desirable for everyone, not just women. By destroying the present society and building a society on feminist principles, men will be forced to live in the human community on terms very different from the present. For that to happen, feminism must be asserted by women as the basis of revolutionary social change. (Dunbar, 1970, p. 499)


maternal and material :  the substntial material nature of the world 

Anarchism as a Programme of Nurturance
I would argue that the importance of maternal nurturance is at the very core of the anarchocommunist project articulated by Peter Kropotkin and others. Errico Malatesta once attested to this aspect of Kropotkin’s personality, remarking:

I remember what [Kropotkin] did in Geneva in the winter of 1879 to help a group of Italian refugees in dire straits, among them myself; I remember the small attentions, I would call maternal, which he bestowed on me when one night in London having been the victim of an accident I went and knocked on his door; I recall the innumerable kind actions towards all sorts of people. (Malatesta, 1965, p. 258)

Beyond this anecdotal evidence, when we read Kropotkin’s work, we should be reminded of how much his thinking resonates with Sara Ruddick’s characterization of care work as the organization of the material world in terms of people’s needs and desires.

The best way to understand Kropotkin’s thinking is to see how much it embraces human vulnerability and how much it insists upon the paramount virtue of nurturance. In his writings on mutual aid, Kropotkin repeatedly articulates the value of human dependency. For example, he characterizes solidarity as ‘the unconscious recognition of the force that is borrowed by each man from the practice of mutual aid; of the close dependency of everyone’s happiness upon the happiness of all’ (1902, pp. xliii–xliv). Kropotkin’s notion of dependency seems remarkable in several ways. First, he does not equate the notion of dependency with that of domination. Second, his notion of mutual aid emphasizes human dependency more than it does human capacity. That is, he concentrates not on the fact that people possess powers that they can contribute to the common good, but rather that each of us depends radically on the sustenance granted by infinite others. Third, his idea of dependency should not be reduced to the reciprocity of interdependence. While it may be true from an outside perspective that all of our social contributions balance each other out, what is important is that, from my own perspective, I realize how indebted I am to the rest of humanity.

Kropotkin’s interpretation of human dependence provides the basis for his critique of property ownership. People depend so utterly upon what other people have already contributed that they never have a foundation to claim anything as their own. Private property is unjust not simply because it fails to recognize the worker’s agency as a producer, but rather because it neglects to accept our infinite dependency as consumers. For this reason, Kropotkin declares:

All things are for all men, since all men have need of them, since all men have worked in the measure of their strength to produce them, and since it is not possible to evaluate every one’s part in the production of the world’s wealth. That each and every person has a right to well being; there is a right to well being for all. (Kropotkin, 1995, p. 19)

According to Kropotkin, the problem of satisfying needs is the most essential problem of all revolutionary problems, and the question of how we nurture each other is the most important of all revolutionary questions.

The analysis of human needs also provides the basis for Kropotkin’s critique of capitalism and the state. First, Kropotkin argues that capitalism, supported by the state, reorients material life such that it caters to the needs of the rich: rather than providing well-being for all of humanity, production becomes focused on producing luxury items for the wealthy – and by extension, for wealthy countries like our own. Second, he explains that the wealth of the wealthy ultimately derives from the poverty of the poor. Only because people are allowed to suffer such profound material destitution can the capitalist compel them to become labourers, paying them a meagre wage that allows them barely to subsist. Third, one of the alibis that the state employs to justify its existence is its monopoly over the activity of care. The state eliminates autonomous institutions of mutual aid, replacing them with various forms of charity, welfare and health care. While any form of care is significant and should be defended, the care function of the state allows it to mask the fact that the state exists as the institution that facilitates the domination of the rich and powerful and abets the immiseration of the poor and subjugated.

Despite the efforts of the state to monopolize caring, anarchists have persevered in the effort to create a society based on mutual aid. The revolutionary significance of an anarchism based on nurturance can be observed in both institutional and spontaneous settings. Anarchist groups such as Food Not Bombs organize to feed the hungry; the Really Really Free Market organizes to provide a space for free exchange of goods; the Icarus Project organizes to help people with psychological difficulties to give each other support and therapy; various squatting initiatives help people to find shelter.

In addition, we have seen examples of spontaneous anarchist nurturance throughout the uprisings in North Africa. What seems remarkable about these revolutions is not just that people rose up en masse to overthrow their leaders, but also the way that they supported each other throughout. Protesters in Tahrir Square, for example, managed to keep each other fed, tended to each other’s bodily needs, and endeavoured to keep each other safe. Reporting from Egypt, Mohammed Bamyeh marvelled at how the occupants of the square:

established autonomous field hospitals to treat the injured; formed street committees to maintain security and hygiene. I saw peasant women giving protestors onions to help them recover from teargas attacks .... and countless other incidents of generous civility amidst the prevailing destruction and chaos. ... During the ensuing week and a half, millions converged on the streets almost everywhere in Egypt, and one could empirically see how noble ethics – community and solidarity, care for others, respect for the dignity of all, feeling of personal responsibility for everyone – emerge precisely out of the disappearance of government. (Bamyeh, 2011)

A similar gesture of solidarity was practised by Tunisians who, having consummated their uprising, welcomed refugees from the Libyan conflict with food and shelter. The New York Times quotes Abdallah Awaye explaining, ‘This is how it is, these are our customs. If there is something to eat, we will eat it together. If there is nothing to eat, we will have nothing together’ (Sayare, 2011). Such behaviour constitutes the very greatest example of ethical anarchism.


Explore the literature on nurturance and explore the metaphorics of maternity in Levinas
Occupying the same body and the embodiment.  the two as one.   the birth alrady of birth.   
the 

In this paper, I will reading the ideas of Petr Kropotkin through the lens of feminist care ethics to illuminate the aims and aspirations of anarchism.  Anarchism in general can be understood by inspecting the root of the word itself: anarchy based in the root as something that is against the any arche, any absolute principle that would take itself to be primary and determinative for all other realities.  In general, anarchism can be understood as three primary focuses of arche:  capitalism, the domination of man through economic means; religion, the domination of man through a spiritual or ideological principles; and the state, the domination through the administrative and police powers of the state.      
Beyond these threefold threats of domination, what other 
1.	Introduction
a.	What are the goals of anarchism
b.	Define anarchism as refusal of arche
i.	Anarchism widely considered is the refusal of a ruler or an arche a ruling principle
ii.	What is a ruling principle?
1.	Church
2.	The state
iii.	What results in the respect of the removing of the constraints of the rule and the domination?
iv.	Free individual able to assert itself and to project its own will upon the world  
c.	Autonomy
i.	Freedom that is the self-rule
ii.	Autarchy
iii.	Kantian liberal individual way of understanding the way of being in the world
iv.	Self rule and self directed.  
v.	But is being freed from the world in such a way that one is able to view the world as one’s own and under one’s own purview and will, being able to subject oneself through one’s own will and thorough the 
d.	Heteronomy
i.	Whether the selfhood is the first principle to start from. 
ii.	Whether the principle can come from an outside 
e.	Self not as self-made but as already relational and related
i.	Way of understanding heteronomy as dependence as an other not as simply a limit to the freedom of the self but as already the context and the condition for human freedom
2.	Kropotkin and dependency and interdependence.
a.	Mutual aid as interdependence
i.	Not a tit for tat exchange You do something for me and I do something for you
ii.	Not reciprocity 
iii.	Doesn’t depend on the fact that you give and I get
b.	Three major concepts he outlines
i.	Dependency
ii.	Need
iii.	Consumption 
c.	A simple exchange of  


degrowth movement

absence is always presence
what isn't is alawys there

wrapping us in its petrochemical life
but behind it is this megamachine
this mechanical megamachine



Negotiating with nature on behalf o f love, harassed by daily de­
mands, yet glimpsing larger questions, mothers acquire a funda­
mental attitude toward the vulnerable, a characterological
protectiveness that I call “ holding.” To hold means to minimize risk and to reconcile differences rather than to sharply accentuate
them. Holding is a way o f seeing with an eye toward maintaining
the minimal harmony, material resources, and skills necessary for
sustaining a child in safety. It is the attitude elicited by the work
o f “ world-protection, world-preservation, world-repair . . . the
invisible weaving o f a frayed and threadbare family life.” 11 Scru­
tiny, humility, and cheerfulness mark the minds o f those who
protect because the holding that these virtues make possible is as
sturdy and sane for both protector and protected as nature (human
and otherwise) allows.
Holding, the fundamental attitude o f protectiveness, is, like the
virtues that enable it, liable to lapse into degenerative forms: hold­
ing too close, too timidly, too materially, collecting and accu­
mulating possessions in which to embed lives that are slipping
away. There is no doubt that holding can drive adolescent children
crazy. Protectiveness characterized by holding is no one’s idea o f
“ adventure” — a quintessential^ mother-free notion. Mothers
themselves can feel the victim o f their own habits o f protectiveness
that stand in the way o f children’s need to grow their own way.
Protective mothers often take on themselves the task o f hold­
ing together relationships — with Father, lover, grandparents,
teacher — on which their children depend. Such holding and har­
monizing has its risks. Some mothers, out o f concern for their
children, are inappropriately courteous to rude doctors or teachers,
flatter their bosses, and stay in marriages that harm them. More­
over, the cognitive gifts and virtues o f preservative love — scru­
tiny, cheerfulness, and humility — are, like protective holding
itself, not only convenient in subordinates but also associated with
and perhaps more highly developed in powerless peoples. To cel­
ebrate them can seem tantamount to celebrating oppression itself.
On the other hand, these same capacities may prove more effective
in political struggle than their detractors suspect.

Central tasks o f fostering growth are administrative. In com­
munities that support mothers and their children, mothers orga­
nize places and times in which infants and toddlers can socialize
and mothers can have time to find themselves. Later, in class­
rooms, playing fields, blocked-off streets, and meeting houses,
mothers arrange for or provide safe occasions for learning and
friendship. At the heart o f a mother’s arrangements is a “ home. ”
A home may consist of several families, of all the women and
children o f a community, o f one mother in one room with several
children, o f a male and female parent and their children, of two
or more men or women together, who may or may not be lovers.
Whatever its particular structure, a home is the headquarters for
a mother’s organizing and a child’s growing. Home is where chil­
dren are supposed to return when their world turns heartless,
where they center themselves in the world they are discovering

B y “ women’s work” — the basis for a feminist standpoint —
Hartsock has in mind “ caring labor” : birthing labor and lactation;
production and preparation o f food; mothering; kin work; house­
work; nursing; many kinds o f teaching; and care o f the frail elderly
— all work that is characteristically performed in exploitative and
oppressive circumstances. I believe, as I argued in Chapter 2, that
it is at least premature to assimilate these different kinds o f work
as maternal work. Nonetheless, it is certainly the case that maternal
practices make up a central part o f caring labor, and hence maternal
thinking in its many variations could be considered a constituent
element o f the standpoint that Hartsock envisions. Or, to put the
point romantically — adapting Foucault — maternal thinking is a
“ subjugated knowledge,” “ lost in an all-encompassing theoretical
framework or erased in a triumphal history o f ideas” — “ regarded
with disdain by intellectuals as being either primitive or woefully
incomplete” yet likely to become “ insurrectionary.” 8
This invigorating language is more than rhetoric. H

This means that the material world, seen under the aspect o f
caring labor, is organized in terms of people’s needs and pleasures
and, by extension, o f the needs and pleasures o f any animal or
plant that is instrumental in human caring or is tended for its own
sake. The value o f objects and accomplishments turns on their
usefulness in satisfying needs and giving pleasures rather than on
the money to be made by selling them or the prestige by ownin

Feminist standpoint philosophers — among them philosophi­
cally minded, and feminist maternal thinkers — directly oppose
this “ masculine” fantasy o f transcendence. Their task is to redefine
reason and restructure its priorities so that thoughtful people will
be able to “ generalize the potentiality made available by the activity
o f women” — i.e., caring labor — to society as a whole.

A different dynamic unfolded in the periphery. There, as extractive
colonialism ravaged subjugated populations, neither separate spheres
nor social protection enjoyed any currency. Far from seeking to protect
indigenous relations of social reproduction, metropolitan powers
actively promoted their destruction. Peasantries were looted, their
communities wrecked, to supply the cheap food, textiles, mineral ore,
and energy without which the exploitation of metropolitan industrial
workers would not have been profitable. In the Americas, meanwhile,
enslaved women’s reproductive capacities were instrumentalized to the
profit calculations of planters, who routinely tore apart families by selling
their members off separately to different slaveowners.15 Native children,
too, were ripped from their communities, conscripted into missionary
schools, and subjected to coercive disciplines of assimilation.16 When
rationalizations were


9 To fill the “care gap,” the regime imports
migrant workers from poorer to richer countries. Typically, it is racialized
and/or rural women from poor regions who take on reproductive and
caring labor previously performed by more privileged women. But to
do this, the migrants must transfer their own familial and community
responsibilities to other, still poorer caregivers, who must in turn do
the same—and on and on, in ever longer “global care chains.” Far from
filling the care gap, the net effect is to displace it—from richer to poorer
families, from the Global North to the Global South.

d. The domestic tasks of wives and mothers became
invisible as work, while women who worked for wages were considered
the exception, not the rule. In this way, dependence on the wage not
only integrated men and women into capitalist relations, but worked
to formalize a rigid and hierarchical gendered division of labor within
working-class households.15


employed to do the heavy, dirty, “back-room” chores of cooking and
serving food in restaurants and cafeterias, cleaning rooms in hotels
and office buildings, and caring for the elderly and ill in hospitals and
nursing homes, including cleaning rooms, making beds, changing
bed pans, and preparing food, while white women tended to fill the
professional, administrative, and supervisory occupations in the very
same settings.97

 Unpaid
domestic labor has continued to be a crucial site of feminist inquiry to
uncover the oppression of women in capitalist patriarchal societies. 

e unpaid labor of enslaved African American women
during US slavery and the lack of attention to the paid domestic labor
that many African American women performed in the post-slavery
period, which continues today.5


tion is
temporally and spatially separate from the sphere of production. Second,
Marxist feminists define unpaid domestic labor only along the terms of
use value. Finally, black feminists show that unpaid labor began during
the transatlantic slave trade. They deconstruct the neat divisions of
home/work time and private/public space: enslaved women could be
asked to perform tasks at any time, and some women worked within the
homes of slave owners while others worked in agricultural fields

American women were more likely to perform
low-waged work (e.g. as nurse aides and childcare aides), whereas
Anglo-American women often held higher-waged, skilled, and valued
employment in positions such as nurses, mid-wives, and occupational
health therapist assistants.27 At a general level, reproductive labor is
devalued; for racialized women, however, it is even further devalu

estic work, sex work, and caring work. As
the demographic shift in Europe and North America means that more
middle-class women are employed in the formal labor market and people
are living longer, there is a need for workers to perform the cooking,
cleaning, and caregiving tasks that middle-class women no longer wish
to perform in the home.35
The economic contributions


isabled white working class femme poet Tara Hardy recently remarked, “Femmes get objectified two ways, one sexually, the other as Mommy.” In the sexist world, Mommy does a million hours of unpaid labor a week without anyone asking them.

o transform anything we need to. And all of this has started me thinking about what the solutions might be. If care labor is well, labor, and we participate in an emotional economy all the time, what would a just care labor economy look and feel like? What would I want the conditions of my labor to be, in order to feel that my work was in safe, compensated conditions that had my workers’ rights at the center?

ll of this has made us very sophisticated at negotiating care, including our understanding that both offering and receiving it is a choice. The idea of consent in care is a radical notion stemming from disabled community wisdom. Ableism mandates that disabled people are supposed to gratefully accept any care offered to “fix” us. It’

t’s also important to hold that every care exchange doesn’t have to be 50/50 all the time. This is especially important for folks with a lot of disability or other needs who need a lot of care to survive, who may not always be able to offer a ton back. People who need a lot of care are often told we are a “drain”—on the system, on our families or communities, and this can play out in everything from “better off dead” suicide laws targeting disabled people to parents and disabled folks feeling like we’re too “needy” to be part of movements. Everyone deserves to get the care we need. 

alking about a culture of appreciation, respect, and thank yous for care that doesn’t have to do with groveling. I am talking about what many of us already do: notice, thank, and witness the work being done.

Imagine how free we could get if instead of femme labor being an unpaid, demanded Mommy tap, we could be thanked and compensated for our work, and then kick back and put our feet up, smiling. Imagine if it was compensated and the labor conditions were fair, maybe everyone would want to do it more. Imagine if we were respected for our care labor, but also allowed to be more than our care labor. 

Imagine how much we could win if there was more than enough care to go around.  

And because: your life as a working-class or poor and/or sex-working and/or disabled and/or
Black or brown femme person has taught you that the only damn way you or anybody survives is
by helping each other. No institutions exist to help us survive—we survive because of each other.


y—where
endless free care work and emotional labor is simply the role my community and the world has
for us. We are supposed to wipe the asses of the world without ceasing. A

Far too often, the emotional labor we do as femmes or feminine people
is not seen as labor—it’s seen as air. It’s that little thing you do on the side

how
misogyny, femmephobia, and transmisogyny are part of global systems of gender that extract a
hell of a lot of labor and energy from femme and feminized people, from parenting and
caretaking being considered “free labor” to sexist assumptions of femme perma-availability
being made in queer and trans communities. Al

ove how working-class, femme, and disabled this care labor is. I just want it to also not be seen
as an automatic expectation of any femme at any time! I want some rules so we don’t feel
drained, exhausted, and fucked over. I want it to be a choice. And I want its next-level genius of
skill to be recognized. This is skilled labor! 

So I would like to advance the radical notion that providing care is work. By work, I mean it’s just
that: work. I mean that the care work we give is essential to building movements that are
accessible and sustaina

eattle’s queer theater,
“Femmes get objectified two ways, one sexually, the other as Mommy.” In the sexist world,
Mommy does a million hours of unpaid labor a week without anyone asking them. 

Many, many things shifted in my life when I started to think of my care labor as labor, not just
“the right thing to do” or “I’ll just answer their question, it’ll only take a minute.” When I started
thinking about how much free work I could afford to offer, and if there might be some things I’d
like in return. 

, a “Hey, I
see the work you just put in” or a “I’m too sick to do anything right now, but I can offer this when
I can.” Shit, I had someone give me a ten-dollar jar of fa

It can become an ongoing responsive ecosystem, where what is grown responds to

magine how free we could get if instead of femme labor being an unpaid, demanded mommy
tap, we could be thanked and compensated for our work, and then kick back and put our feet up,
smiling. Imagine if it was compensated and the labor conditions were fair—maybe everyone
would want to do it more. Imagine if we were not only respected for our care labor but also
allowed to be more than our care labor. 
Imagine how much we could win if there was more than enough care to go around.
need
