Introduction:  Evolution of mutuality
--------------------------------------

Hi.  Thanks for coming to my talk.

1.  Question of mutuality
   1. Kropotkin
   2. Hrdy


2.  What is evolution?
   1.  Becoming of the species through time.
      1. What is becoming: this is one of the primary questions 
         1. How do thing persist in being?  This "sist" in persist is from a ancient root "STA", which is echoed in the English word "stand", also in the Spizozist question of "substance".   To Exist, "to step out, stand forth", key question of Heidegger, Sartre, and Levinas. For now, though, the question of persistence can be most clearly articulated in the question: in what sense is the thing now the same as as the thing in the past and in the future? 

We have the ideas but of three sorts of substances: 1. GOD. 2. FINITE INTELLIGENCES. 3. BODIES.


         "ANOTHER occasion the mind often takes of comparing, is the very being of things, when, considering ANYTHING AS EXISTING AT ANY DETERMINED TIME AND PLACE, we compare it with ITSELF EXISTING AT ANOTHER TIME, and thereon form the ideas of IDENTITY and DIVERSITY." Locke 

         Particle Theory Locke:  Thirdly, The same will hold of every PARTICLE OF MATTER, to which no addition or subtraction of matter being made, it is the same. 

         Individual: From what has been said, it is easy to discover what is so much inquired after, the PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS; and that, it is plain, is existence itself; which determines a being of any sort to a particular time and place, incommunicable to two beings of the same kind. 

         How is the present time presented? As a present? , presented at the  e.  How do things explode outwards into time, 

        . let us suppose an atom, i.e. a continued body under one immutable superficies, existing in a determined time and place; it is evident, that, considered in any instant of its existence, it is in that instant the same with itself.

        This also shows wherein the identity of the same MAN consists; viz. in nothing but a participation of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same organized body.  of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same organized body. He that shall place the identity of man in anything else, but, like that of other animals, in one fitly organized body, taken in any one instant, and from thence continued, under one organization of life, in several successively fleeting particles of matter united to it, will find it hard to make an embryo, one of years, mad and sober, the SAME man, by any supposition, that will not make it possible for Seth, Ismael, Socrates, Pilate, St. Austin, and Caesar Borgia, to be the same man.

        It is not therefore unity of substance that comprehends all sorts of identity, or will determine it in every case; but to conceive and judge of it aright, we must consider what idea the word it is applied to stands for: it being one thing to be the same SUBSTANCE, another the same MAN, and a third the same PERSON, if PERSON, MAN, and SUBSTANCE, are three names standing for three different ideas;—for such as is the idea belonging to that name, such must be the identity; which, if it had been a little more carefully attended to, would possibly have prevented a great deal of that confusion which often occurs about this matter, with no small seeming difficulties, especially concerning PERSONAL identity, which therefore we shall in the next place a little consider.

        This being premised, to find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what PERSON stands for;—which, I think, is a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places; which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable from thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it: it being impossible for any one to perceive without PERCEIVING that he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will anything, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present sensations and perceptions: and by this every one is to himself that which he calls SELF:—it not being considered, in this case, whether the same self be continued in the same or divers substances. For, since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, in this alone consists personal identity, i.e. the sameness of a rational being: and as far as this consciousness can be extended backwards to any past action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person; it is the same self now it was then; and it is by the same self with this present one that now reflects on it, that that action was done.



11. Personal Identity.
This being premised, to find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what PERSON stands for;—which, I think, is a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places; which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable from thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it: it being impossible for any one to perceive without PERCEIVING that he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will anything, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present sensations and perceptions: and by this every one is to himself that which he calls SELF:—it not being considered, in this case, whether the same self be continued in the same or divers substances. For, since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, in thisy oka alone consists personal identity, i.e. the sameness of a rational being: and as far as this consciousness can be extended backwards to any past action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person; it is the same self now it was then; and it is by the same self with this present one that now reflects on it, that that action was done.

12. Consciousness makes personal Identity.
But it is further inquired, whether it be the same identical substance. This few would think they had reason to doubt of, if these perceptions, with their consciousness, always remained present in the mind, whereby the same thinking thing would be always consciously present, and, as would be thought, evidently the same to itself. But that which seems to make the difficulty is this, that this consciousness being interrupted always by forgetfulness, there being no moment of our lives wherein we have the whole train of all our past actions before our eyes in one view, but even the best memories losing the sight of one part whilst they are viewing another; and we sometimes, and that the greatest part of our lives, not reflecting on our past selves, being intent on our present thoughts, and in sound sleep having no thoughts at all, or at least none with that consciousness which remarks our waking thoughts,—I say, in all these cases, our consciousness being interrupted, and we losing the sight of our past selves, doubts are raised whether we are the same thinking thing, i.e. the same SUBSTANCE or no. Which, however reasonable or unreasonable, concerns not PERSONAL identity at all. The question being what makes the same person; and not whether it be the same identical substance, which always thinks in the same person, which, in this case, matters not at all: different substances, by the same consciousness (where they do partake in it) being united into one person, as well as different bodies by the same life are united into one animal, whose identity is preserved in that change of substances by the unity of one continued life. For, it being the same consciousness that makes a man be himself to himself, personal identity depends on that only, whether it be annexed solely to one individual substance, or can be continued in a succession of several substances. For as far as any intelligent being CAN repeat the idea of any past action with the same consciousness it had of it at first, and with the same consciousness it has of any present action; so far it is the same personal self. For it is by the consciousness it has of its present thoughts and actions, that it is SELF TO ITSELF now, and so will be the same self, as far as the same consciousness can extend to actions past or to come; and would be by distance of time, or change of substance, no more two persons, than a man be two men by wearing other clothes to-day than he did yesterday, with a long or a short sleep between: the same consciousness uniting those distant actions into the same person, whatever substances contributed to their production.

18. Consciousness alone unites actions into the same Person.
20. Persons, not Substances, the Objects of Reward and Punishment.
25. Consciousness alone unites remote existences into one Person.
28. Person a forensic Term.  -- for analysing cuases, assessing blame and reward 



Marx species Being

Metabolism of life.  


||XXIV| We have still a third aspect of estranged labor to deduce from the two already considered.

Man is a species-being [20], not only because in practice and in theory he adopts the species (his own as well as those of other things) as his object, but – and this is only another way of expressing it – also because he treats himself as the actual, living species; because he treats himself as a universal and therefore a free being.


METABOLISM
The life of the species, both in man and in animals, consists physically in the fact that man (like the animal) lives on organic nature; and the more universal man (or the animal) is, the more universal is the sphere of inorganic nature on which he lives. Just as plants, animals, stones, air, light, etc., constitute theoretically a part of human consciousness, partly as objects of natural science, partly as objects of art – his spiritual inorganic nature, spiritual nourishment which he must first prepare to make palatable and digestible – so also in the realm of practice they constitute a part of human life and human activity. 

BASIC NEEDS
Physically man lives only on these products of nature, whether they appear in the form of food, heating, clothes, a dwelling, etc. The universality of man appears in practice precisely in the universality which makes all nature his inorganic body – both inasmuch as nature is (1) his direct means of life, and (2) the material, the object, and the instrument of his life activity. Nature is man’s inorganic body – nature, that is, insofar as it is not itself human body. Man lives on nature – means that nature is his body, with which he must remain in continuous interchange if he is not to die. That man’s physical and spiritual life is linked to nature means simply that nature is linked to itself, for man is a part of nature.

In estranging from man (1) nature, and (2) himself, his own active functions, his life activity, estranged labor estranges the species from man. It changes for him the life of the species into a means of individual life. First it estranges the life of the species and individual life, and secondly it makes individual life in its abstract form the purpose of the life of the species, likewise in its abstract and estranged form.

LIFE ENGENDERING LIFE --> BIRTH PROCESS
For labor, life activity, productive life itself, appears to man in the first place merely as a means of satisfying a need – the need to maintain physical existence. Yet the productive life is the life of the species. It is life-engendering life. The whole character of a species, its species-character, is contained in the character of its life activity; and free, conscious activity is man’s species-character. Life itself appears only as a means to life.

OBJECTIFICATION and INDIVIDUATION
The animal is immediately one with its life activity. It does not distinguish itself from it. It is its life activity. Man makes his life activity itself the object of his will and of his consciousness. He has conscious life activity. It is not a determination with which he directly merges. Conscious life activity distinguishes man immediately from animal life activity. It is just because of this that he is a species-being. Or it is only because he is a species-being that he is a conscious being, i.e., that his own life is an object for him. Only because of that is his activity free activity. Estranged labor reverses the relationship, so that it is just because man is a conscious being that he makes his life activity, his essential being, a mere means to his existence.

OBJECTS FROM INORGANIC NATURE
In creating a world of objects by his personal activity, in his work upon inorganic nature, man proves himself a conscious species-being, i.e., as a being that treats the species as his own essential being, or that treats itself as a species-being. Admittedly animals also produce. They build themselves nests, dwellings, like the bees, beavers, ants, etc. But an animal only produces what it immediately needs for itself or its young. It produces one-sidedly, whilst man produces universally. It produces only under the dominion of immediate physical need, whilst man produces even when he is free from physical need and only truly produces in freedom therefrom. An animal produces only itself, whilst man reproduces the whole of nature. 

PLUSVALOR
An animal’s product belongs immediately to its physical body, whilst man freely confronts his product. An animal forms only in accordance with the standard and the need of the species to which it belongs, whilst man knows how to produce in accordance with the standard of every species, and knows how to apply everywhere the inherent standard to the object. Man therefore also forms objects in accordance with the laws of beauty.

DUPLICATES SELF, MITOSIS, DIALECTICAL MOMENT, OBJECTIVITY
It is just in his work upon the objective world, therefore, that man really proves himself to be a species-being. This production is his active species-life. Through this production, nature appears as his work and his reality. The object of labor is, therefore, the objectification of man’s species-life: for he duplicates himself not only, as in consciousness, intellectually, but also actively, in reality, and therefore he sees himself in a world that he has created. In tearing away from man the object of his production, therefore, estranged labor tears from him his species-life, his real objectivity as a member of the species and transforms his advantage over animals into the disadvantage that his inorganic body, nature, is taken from him.

Similarly, in degrading spontaneous, free activity to a means, estranged labor makes man’s species-life a means to his physical existence.

The consciousness which man has of his species is thus transformed by estrangement in such a way that species[-life] becomes for him a means.

Estranged labor turns thus:

(3) Man’s species-being, both nature and his spiritual species-property, into a being alien to him, into a means of his individual existence. It estranges from man his own body, as well as external nature and his spiritual aspect, his human aspect.

WHEN MAN CONFRONTS HIMSELF HE CONFRONTS THE OTHER MAN
(4) An immediate consequence of the fact that man is estranged from the product of his labor, from his life activity, from his species-being, is the estrangement of man from man. When man confronts himself, he confronts the other man. What applies to a man’s relation to his work, to the product of his labor and to himself, also holds of a man’s relation to the other man, and to the other man’s labor and object of labor.

In fact, the proposition that man’s species-nature is estranged from him means that one man is estranged from the other, as each of them is from man’s essential nature.

OTHER MAN as CAPITALIST, vs SPECIES BEING (generality)
The estrangement of man, and in fact every relationship in which man [stands] to himself, is realized and expressed only in the relationship in which a man stands to other men.

Hence within the relationship of estranged labor each man views the other in accordance with the standard and the relationship in which he finds himself as a worker.





   1.  Definition of species and species-being.  Marxist context of 1844 manuscripts
   2. Taxonomic charts 
Obligatory hierarchy of ranks
animals	plants
domain	Eukaryota	Eukaryota
kingdom	Animalia	Plantae
phylum	Chordata	Tracheophyta
class	Mammalia	Pteropsida
order	Primates	Coniferales
family	Hominidae	Pinaceae
genus	Homo	Pinus
species	Homo sapiens (modern human)	Pinus strobus (white pine
question of evolution -- the persistence of life over time.  how does it continue over time.  what is life? is it just a biological process or is there seomthg prof9oudn that undergirds it.  and that connects life to each other 

how is life more than a mechanical process 

early science question of mechanism, how things work together, how things are produced.  what is the singular collisions of atoms and the consistency of consiosuness


1 - The Enduring Legacy of Aristotle: The Battle over Life as Self-Organization or (Genetic-Based) Reproduction
: (1) the capacity to
self-organize and maintain self-organization for an extended period of time against
both external and internal perturbations and (2) the capacity to reproduce and (in
light of Darwin’s theory of evolution) transmit to progeny adaptive characteristics.

As Aristotle argued, living
things are not just fed, they feed themselves, and they are not just copied, they
reproduce themselves.  Characteristic O reflects this view in explicitly referring to
the idea of self-organization. Similarly, characteristic R implicitly assumes that
organisms contain an internal principle for generating organisms resembling them-
selves; external processes do not (like a 3D printer) duplicate them

In his most theoretical work in biology, De Anima (trans. Barnes 1984 and
also Shields 2013; reprinted in Bedau and Cleland 2010), Aristotle discusses the
nature of life, distinguishing living things from nonliving things in terms of
functional capacities such as nutrition, reproduction, sensation or perception,
locomotion, and thinking (De Anima Bks I and II). He identifies nutrition and
reproduction as more basic than the others. For Aristotle, nutrition is not nutrients
(food) but rather the internal capacity or “power”[dynamis, in ancient Greek] of
an organism to acquire (absorb), process (digest), and use nutrients for biological
ends such as development, growth, maintenance, and repair; tellingly, he uses the
terms “self-nutrition”and “nutrition”interchangeably in his writing

"spontaneous assembly" "emergence"

In contrast, the causal processes responsible for constructing
and maintaining an organism are internal; organisms build and regenerate them-
selves.
teleological causation instead of the moment of birth
Aristotle postu-
lated a special form of natural causation (De Anima Bk I). Living things are self-
causing in the sense that they have internal regulative principles or “souls

 But,
while self-generated activities and goal-directed activities often coincide, they need
not. In

All
living things (plants and animals) share the most basic soul powers, (self-) nutrition
and reproduction. In this context, it is important to distinguish Aristotle’s concept
of reproduction from his notion of regeneration, which he would classify under
nutrition because it involves the capacity of an existing organism to sustain and
repair itself. 

al than the other. In some passages he suggests that
nutrition is more fundamental: “It follows that first of all we must treat of nutrition
and reproduction, for the nutritive soul is found along with all the others and is the
most primitive and widely distributed power of soul, being indeed that one in
virtue of which all are said to have life

 They proposed an
alternative to vitalism that has come to be known as emergentism. 


1.5.1 Metabolism-Based Versus Evolution-Based Definitions
of the Nature of Life

Metabolism-based definitions characterize life as a self-organizing system
having the capacity to sustain itself against degrading processes for an extended
period of time by extracting material, energy or information from its environment.
The most popular metabolic definitions can be classified as chemical-metabolic,
thermodynamic, or autopoietic
These categories correspond to different levels
of abstraction, with chemical-metabolic definitions being the most closely tailored
to the metabolic processes of familiar Earth life and autopoietic definitions being
the furthest removed. On a chemically based metabolic definition, life is a chemical
reaction system that sustains itself by extracting and transforming chemical energy
from its environment (e.g., 

The concept of metabolism underlying metabolic definitions of life is strikingly
similar to Aristotle’s notion of self-nutrition. Metabolic definitions emphasize the
capacity of a living system to sustain itself as an “organized being”by extracting
and processing “nutrients”(material, energetic, or even purely informational)
found in its environment. 

1.5.2 Metabolism-First Versus Genes-First Theories of the Origin(s) of Life

Metabolism -- self organized forces of dynamic
* Aristotle's account of metabolism sought to explain how food was processed by the body to provide both heat and the materials for the body's construction and maintenance.

* Metabolism is the process by which your body converts what you eat and drink into energy. During this complex process, calories in food and beverages are combined with oxygen to release the energy your body needs to function.

* Decay and death

* Two component parts of metabolism: 
* * Eating food -- each of these depend on the other.  conversion of energy to human.  eating as canibalism or murder.  meat is murder.    
* * Breathing air


Home as the place for this:  
* Home as the locus of patriarchal institution
* Aristotle the idea of the oikos and the dominator 
* Domus vs dominus -- the householder
* Our needs are what enslaves us in Arendt
* Engels on the origin of the state 

Domination by needs in Arendt

The Home as Welcome Itself 
First of all, Levinas can be understood as subverting gender norms.  Levinas describes the production of the home as “welcome in itself – the feminine being” (157.)  If Levinas here characterizes feminine alterity by the “welcome” it offers, then we can only conclude that the ethical subject is figured as a woman a few pages later.  “I welcome the Other who presents himself in my home by opening my home to him” (171.)  In fact, my identification as a welcoming woman is the very basis of Levinasian ethics, as “metaphysics, transcendence, the welcoming of the other by the same” (43.)  Even though Levinas’s equation of the feminine with the domestic is problematic, his characterization of ethical subjectivity and ethics itself as feminine already undermines the Western tradition of patriarchal domination.

Secondly, Levinas can be understood as not only subverting the dominance of the masculinity, but also his conception of the home can be understood as subversion of the political itself.  That is, I would respond to the often-asked question in Levinas’s scholarship, “how can his ethics be turned into a program for politics”, with the response that we should instead investigate the home as a model for human sociality.   Levinas breaks with the heroic fantasy of Western patriarchy that defines the citizen as someone who has (1) individuated himself away from the domestic sphere, and (2) united with other individuals within the political sphere.  In contrast to this, Levinas’s analysis of the home demonstrates how we are always already dependent upon the domestic welcome of an Other and always already responsible for providing domestic welcomes for other Others.


SELF-ORGANIZATION
Heidegger rearticulates the deprecation of the feminine locus of the house in hiw wartime writings.  In Introduction to Metaphysics, Heidegger elaborates his characterization of the Greek concept of Being, physis, as the self-blossoming emergence of Being, as something that manifests through the dynamics of violence, power, and struggle.  According to Heidegger, however, this conception became corrupted as it drifted away from its Greek root.  He explains, “This basic Greek word for essent is commonly translated as ‘nature.’  This derives from the Latin translation, natura, which properly means ‘to be born,’ ‘birth.’ But with this Latin translation the original meaning of the Greek word physis is thrust aside, the actual philosophical force of the Greek word is destroyed.”  Exemplifying Nancy Hartsock’s critique of heroism, this quote displays the degree to which Heidegger refuses to accept the reality of human birth, the fact that all created beings are fundamentally dependent.  The notion of a self-emerging, self-manifesting physis seems like a strange male fantasy of independence.  Heidegger refuses to accept the dynamics of creation, that being is not self-emergent but always dependent upon an other that brings it forth.  
 He interprets the polis as emerging out of the Greek articulation of Being itself.  He asserts that physis, the self-standing and self-emerging, is equivalent to logos, the gathering together of the gathered, and that the polis is the site in which this gathering-together occurs.  He further remarks, “Polis means, rather, the place, the there (Da), wherein and as which historical being-there (Dasein) is.”  That is, the very place where human existence occurs, the very Da of one’s Dasein is defined to be the polis.  The polis is thus deemed the space where authentic human emergence can take place; where poets can actually be poets, priests can actually be priests, and rulers can actually be rulers.  Heidegger explains his usage of the copula, stating la: “Be, but this means: as violent men to use power, to become preeminent in historical being as creators, as men of action.”

BIRTH NON CHOSEN 
   In contrast, Levinas remarks that  “the idea of causa sui … is belied by birth, non-chosen and impossible to choose … which situates the will in an anarchic world, that is, a world without origin.”

The Home in bell hooks
why the interbeing is a separation 
. In addition to reconsidering the importance of maternal care, other feminist thinkers have similarly re-evaluated the category of domestic nurturance. For example, bell hooks discusses how black women maintained what she calls ‘home place’ as a site of resistance against rampant racism, a refuge where people could gather and heal themselves from the wounds inflicted by a hostile society (2001, pp. 41–9).

Also a communion of needs, the companion, in aristotle the meal tub fellows.  

Birth as different process of generation.  A connection to other people as through a family, something volutary and involuntary connection with other people. 

And other peoplea se tending to our needs
through the worker the person externalizes himself and through the abstraction of their labor
in birth and practice of mothering through the substanc eof the human body itself  
levinas and materiality and a temporality 


Mitchell The gist of the distinction I was trying to make was between the list of good things alternate caregivers may do (e.g., defending a child against an attacker) that you had provided and the idea that such caregivers’ involvement in a child’s life may reduce the likelihood of a child being subject to coercive treatment, even by other caregivers…the idea being I can imagine a protective-yet-coercive grandparent and yet there is empirical evidence that maybe the cooccurrence of coercion and that kind of protection is…not as common as their decoupling.

The domus as feast locus with dom as loafward harkens back to readings about the closure of the commons and prior transition to grain-based diets. Prompts me to reconsider the potential power of events like the block party or church social…looking through the questionable etymological link between potluck and potlatch.




On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 10:32 PM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
So what's really so interesting about Sarah Hrdy's argument is that it takes place against the background of familial violence, specifically infanticide -- the grandmother is lauded for her fearless defense of the baby against male violence.  Hrdy does mention some formula for formula for calculating social bonds from capacity for survival.  I don't know how  a mathematical reduction would affect the argument.  In any case I don't understand the distinction between these "some of the behaviors you indicated seemed less relational (how we treat each other) and more motivated by relation (defending you against an attacker/illness because you're my grandkid...and maybe I let the attacker's grandkid wither)"

As far as the family and domination:  yes, exactly the patriarchal family is constructed as such.  Domus = home, as in domicile; but also Dom = domination.  The Dominator is the ruler of the home.  But this definition of the home as a locus for domination also lies alongside the definition of the home as a place where needs are met, where things are eaten, where the metabolism of life occurs:

From an old paper:
"Not only does Aristotle claim that the home is encompassed within the state, but he also intersects these two communal spheres in the figure of the patriarch, who establishes his dominion over the domestic sphere through a process of domination and domestication, and who establishes the science of oikonomos (economy) to order the household and to acquire property (1996, 1253b1ff). However, Aristotle supplements this patriarchal analysis of the household with a secondary definition. The household is not simply the locus of domination, but more fundamentally, it is the association where people come together to attend to their everyday needs and wants, the communal space where people become companions through the activity of eating together (Aristotle, 1996, 1252b12–20)."


On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 10:48 AM Ben Blohowiak <ben.blohowiak@gmail.com> wrote:
Hey Mitchell I think I smell what you're cookin and FWIW there is a body of empirical research that isn't explicitly coded as anarchist that may be of interest. 

It talks about things like "coercive family processes" and "the coercive cycle" (which may have mappings to that undefined menace, domination) in contrast to practices more consistent with prosocial relations, flourishing, etc. [Disclaimer: a bunch of this research is couched in terms of social control in the literature, i.e., funding sources want an answer to "how do 'we' prevent infants from becoming criminals?", though findings may have more general applicability.] 
Relations of coercion within family systems prompt some of my concerns regarding non-state or informal hierarchy. Also, the idea that state systems "roll their shit downhill" such that familial relations tend toward coercion may be an oversimplification that nevertheless indicates a role played by economic and political context in shaping familial interactions such that child and caregiver flourishing/freedom is damaged in a way that tends to reproduce intergenerationally (incarceration, impoverishment, etc.).   

I'd need to search for pertinent publications, but I recall anecdotally from my time in the field and in discussions with colleagues that the involvement of so-called alternate caregivers (usually "grandparents") in children's lives tends to correlate inversely with coercive caregiving practices--even those of a primary, non-alternate caregiver--and positively with indicators of child well-being. I'm not sure how much of that may be attributed to a self-selection bias at play (e.g., I get along with my dad because he wasn't awful so now both of us aren't going to be awful to my kid) or how much may be attributed to resource sufficiency (e.g., I might not take as many coercive shortcuts if I had a little help with this kid), but some of the behaviors you indicated seemed less relational (how we treat each other) and more motivated by relation (defending you against an attacker/illness because you're my grandkid...and maybe I let the attacker's grandkid wither). So there may be bridges to be built. 

There's that old line about everybody being brothers; I'll further consider everybody being each other's grandmothers (or alternate caregivers).
"I am not my brother's keeper (and each of us might be his grandmother)."


On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 1:53 AM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
On Fri, Jun 24, 2022 at 10:04 PM <drwdprice@aol.com> wrote:
As an anarchist who is a grandpa, and a grandpa who is an anarchist, I would love to see any writings (or songs or stories) on the subject.

Wayne Price

 
Well honestly Wayne, I think that's pretty important and interesting, really.  I don't quite know how to think about it yet and I haven't been able to turn to my research yet.  Perhaps you could become a subject of empirical research.  

I am basically following through with the lines of questioning formulated Kropotkin, who calls mutual aid "a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution,” and further poses this idea of evolution in terms of *birth*, of material and maternal sustenance, a metabolic and generative transmutation of past substances into that which sustains me, into this thing that I consider myself. “If we have access to intellectual satisfactions and live in not too bad material circumstances, it is because we have benefited, through an accident of birth, by the exploitation to which the workers are subjected; and therefore the struggle for the emancipation of the workers is a duty, a debt which we must repay.” Here, the references are clear echoes of the metabolic described by Marx, how living labor power becomes is converted to the dead capital, consumable within commodities.  But besides this there is also the generative of generations, the labor of birthing labor.

Anthropologist Sarah Hrdy seemingly answers the Kropotkin's inquiry into the evolutionary importance mutual aid in her book "Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual Understanding."  I have been following this throughline for several years ty chrough the metaphorics of the mother, but Hardy clarifies that the nuturing of genesis occurs not just through the mother herself but to the community of *allomothers*, Other Mothers who perform the practice of mothering.  The most siginifcant of these Other Mothers is the grandmother.  Among other primate species, a higher proportion of human women live well past their childbearing years into old age.  The mother's mother is particularly important. Matrilieanal kin will both guard the baby from the attackers and return the baby to its mother after watching it.  According to Hrdy "Maternal grandmothers in particular attach high priority to keeping the mother and her children as well-nourished and healthy as possible", caring for both the cared-for grandchild and the caring mother. Hrdy concludes that the figure of the grandmother is the human secret to the development of mutual understanding, of prosociality, of mutual aid. 
"In an emergency, however, these same socially marginalized old matrons become the most active in defending the group’s feeding grounds from neighboring groups. They are also the most daring in defending infants attacked by infanticidal males. Among langurs, sooty mangabeys, and savanna baboons, it is these 20- to30-­year-­olds who take bigger risks to defend an endangered infant than the victim’s own mother does."

"And no single class of care­givers made a bigger difference than grandmothers. Their presence was correlated with higher child survival
in ev­ery one of the twelve so­ci­e­ties for which relevant data had been recorded."

We see the grandmother's labor everywhere -- as abuelitas selling grasshoppers in the Oaxaca markets, for example.  And below in the meditation on the "seven generations" by Kyle Taylor Lucas of the Tulalip Tribes and the Nlaka’pamux First Nation.

Not sure what you think?



-----Original Message-----
From: Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com>
To: North American anarchist studies network <naasn@googlegroups.com>; APE Anarchist Political Ecology Group <APE@ape.yeswecannibal.org>; anarchist. academics (anarchist.academics@lists.aktivix.org) <anarchist.academics@lists.aktivix.org>; ASN (asn@lists.aktivix.org) <asn@lists.aktivix.org>; John L Protevi <protevi@lsu.edu>; John Clark <clark@loyno.edu>; Margaret Cerullo <margaretcerullo68@gmail.com>; Maria Antonia Carcelen Estrada <acarcelen@usfq.edu.ec>
Sent: Mon, Jun 13, 2022 2:35 pm
Subject: [NAASN] Re: Granarchism?

If anyone knows *where* to look in Leguin or maybe Octavia Butler, that would be great -- I am a slow reader

I reported about the "next seven generations" a few years ago.  Anyone know some good indigenous elaborations of this?
..., an enrolled member of the Tulalip Tribes (USA) and the Nlaka’pamux First Nation (Canada), speaks eloquently on the importance of the Olympia Port Blockade. “This struggle is important because our planet is on fire. As an indigenous woman, I feel a duty to honor my elders and the legacy of my ancestors in caring for this mother earth – and, moreover; I feel a responsibility to my grandchildren and the next seven generations to stand up to the economic machinery propped up by the government, specifically the Port of Olympia, in perpetuating the warming of this planet and the poisoning of water, essential to life. We call ourselves Water Protectors and we were especially inspired by the courageous stand taken at Standing Rock during DAPL. We indigenous peoples came together with our allies here at Olympia Stand to resist the Port of Olympia’s forced complicity in propping up dirty hydraulic fracturing in North Dakota that these proppants support.”


On Mon, Jun 13, 2022 at 1:57 PM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
Hey all,
I have been working for a while to consider how *maternal practice* as defined by Sara Ruddick as "a practice that maintains safety of the child, promotes its strength, and allows it to flourish without establishing any ownership over it" in order to embody the anarchocommunist description of mutual aid “a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution,”

However, Anthropologist Sarah Hrdy posits the *grandmother* as the allomother whose care is most important to caretaking and to species evolution.

Are there any good writings from or about anarchist grandparents and elders more generally? Maybe from Zapatista writings about elders or other indigenous sources? Or Leguin?

Thanks!
Mitchell
--
------------------

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky




--
------------------

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky


--
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "NAASN" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to naasn+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To view this discussion on the web visit
https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/naasn/CACXHKRuErLxSCc_UQ1T3HaujkzN0gewJR3mTeC4g1PJvt%2BQsjg%40mail.gmail.com
.


--
------------------

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky


_______________________________________________
APE mailing list
APE@ape.yeswecannibal.org
http://ape.yeswecannibal.org/listinfo.cgi/ape-yeswecannibal.org

APE Meets Sundays 11:30 am - 1:00 pm US Central time on Zoom at https://lsu.zoom.us/j/93261631331?pwd=RGFFQzVuWHlTUExHc0lvSVBZdVJGdz09


--
------------------

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky



Two quotes from Alexis Pauline Gumbs
One from rest about them shedding skin and becoming other
The other about allomothering