preganncy and birth difernt from us
importance of birth as initiation 
festival of brith most important
hopi the society fo the hopi


spirit as ancestors as 

discusss with you 

reborn life and death is circular
not linear thinking 
death is never an end


very important is the 

ancestors are not far away or are dead.  they are the other living part of the extended faily they live in the other world but they are lving . they speak to themas if they were still with them.  not a separation between the living and the dead.  the ancestors are always with them.  

women in this.  sacred not only as giving 
transform death into life again .  the idea of the rebirth  these ideas of life and death are big different from waht we are accustomed to 


mother earth .  thi idea of rebirth they observe that life is gven back by earth .  after winter.  so they thought that life diesappears in winter and then reapperars 

life is transformed and coming back again
continouous translfromation which mother earth shows

from the obersvation of the sky
as moon and sky are coming in the morning and from the eeast and the west they go down.  they disappear in an uncderwrold. they are reborn the moon and the sun.  the idea of th esky 

not a naive idea but from observation

fromnature they took this idea

animals stars are reborn

art 
all beings are reborn


all things are grounded in mother earth
not in a transcendent god

spirituality is always grounded 
do not eed theology to 
divinty of the world can be explained or wahaterver  
the earth and the universea are the divine powes and we can experience them every day and eery night

my book

divinity is immanent every being star grass are included in this divinity
everything in the world and also other people



children of mother earth
misunderstoood by the white colonists
humansa re nt the top of th efood chain, the best
every being is equal to us.  they have their own wisdom. we learn from animals and plants.  not a heirarchy
each of us created

all things are created by god by mother earth
animls plnats
the mediine wheel each has its own divinity


earth based spirtuality
realistic sprituality  
based on the planet that we are living on now
the great goddes swho gives life to everything
megalithic grave construction
the embedded dead 
fetal position of the dead.  the born
the prgnant belly of the earth
they come back to the birth
mother earth is also giving birht
th 
the mother earth is also giing brith  

so easy to understood

express religious strucutres in tmegalithic architecture

giving birth vs male creator god

creating vs giving birth 


myth of origin of matriarchal pepole always a female being giving birth or creatrix that gives birth to earth

about birth and a loving act to give life to othr beings

patriarhcal.  god creates world by word because he can no t give birth.  he is a  maker not a birth giver.  a techne.  a distinct way to do things.  it's a world of peower  .  making things in his own image.  its an act of power not an act of love like mother 

the birth is not finished. it's part of the child raising.  the giving birth.  the nurturing and caring and looking for others.  it's a contnous process of birthing.  not reduced to other.  others are introduced.  not just biological mothers.  mothers can be mothering. it can be done by non mothers.  anyone who has this prosocial attitude to the others

children come from the ancestors
not from the biology of the father
brother of the mother is the same clan name as mother and her children.  closest relative
consequence of the mother line.

wanted to pass his riches to the son.  patriarchy.  power property. early patriarhy had to take single women out of the clans.  lock her in to monogomous fatherhood .  based on coercion and force 

power over women
maternal uncle as caring for the child

Diego Lopez : I’m struck by the difference between birthing creation, which makes us all semi divine by cosmic heritage vs. creator made or crafted life which makes us all hierarchically lower

not belief its a daily proactice. it's a fact.  daily experience of rebirth.  take it as a fact.  

little girl will rebirth ancestors
https://www.npr.org/2023/06/02/1179850142/weekly-dose-of-wonder-why-we-get-more-genes-from-our-moms

animal laying n egg
pregnant belly egg shaped

giving birth by herself
(the opposite of aristotle?  dunno)
parthenogenic act

basic part is female 
pleides as butterfly woman 

all sourroundinf female ppower of the tao surrounds yin yang male and female

feminine mythologies class
at least the neolithtinc

talk to joana about those readings
ancient
paleolithic peoples have traces of the nandata peple traces of their thinking

rebirth is a fact
an ending translation state of death which comes to rebirth

wore them around their neck
eternity of life 
continouss rebirthing


small decentralized societies,  gift economy 
juchitan is an agricultural icty not one based on extracting value .  not capital based taking money from hinterlands and coloneis


may or november 
pearsten  don't give
folk traditions in europe

tree of life is the materal rith line
the child is the life of the motehr's blood
tree of life 
female line

direct roots to the underworld
tree of life is known to be growing
the roots are in the underworld
\tree of life connects the underworld earth sky
menstrual blood is the blood of lie of the owmen
forms the new child
underwold and sky togehr the eancetroys who life therouh the life 
interconnected 


idnigeonous women and colored women of diasporta  women's culture 
agency and autonomy   grounded in the earth where they have come

Helmuth Schlichtherrle paleolithic feminism

mother children earth 
sd are de[endant on the earth basic elemental things made into a culture
the 
and we are given girht 
allt he matriarch al attitudes underslying
the 

care for the children and care for the earth is fundamental