why should one care about care in a performative way
emphasize the 
militarism 
a will to power in knowledge  
this approach that frame the ethics of care about other people 
an exercise in the will to power 
like i have the aspect of the will to power
a tool for the 
the taoist take on the fact that tao is not only the desire to rule but also not to rule 
most of the analytic 
establisheing the normative principle
why you should refuse to be rules
but also why you should be careful not to rule over others
militarism
underlying quetion is to 
just not to be ruled
and not to rule others 

identify the not only to rule and to not be ruled
domination and the 
this enables you to be able to ask 
a struggle for recogniztion 
to be victorious to be 
the self can be rethought in a stuation is disentangled from the desire to dominate others


where does the rule and the not ruling the others
not dominate others

a new part of the project in the sense that 
anarchist theory that you see around in 
how not ot be ruled  and how not to rule   
and 
how to be ruled and how not to be ruled

robeth grahama neither lords or serfs
la boetie against being ruled voluntary servitude
the self as a substance  instead of 

our gaze is outwards  what happens when you start turning your self inself  the way to affirm yourself is to impose yourself on others

compassion of the self as a substance  and compassion   that is  
interdependence
connection of absence of the self and interdependence and the 
compassion link and the compassion of cares
if i don't exist except through the interependence of all beings   
to engage in the compassion of all beings

decolonize the anarchist canon 
enact a care for others  
perform the kim 
is my theory a way to exercise a will to power already the reflection of the racism of the biases 
clearly formulate the project to decolonize anarchism  
no gods no peripheries  no masters  important to give you a sense of the debate is going .  two directions to decolonize the anarchist canon   .   kyle white .  indigenous and feminist ethics of care and eecology.   questioning the idea of the self.  only the people who can struggle of the recognition like us .   
multicentered perspective.   
not only those who entertain the illusion of self
gender and its discontents   a lot of  rethinking of gender and care 

question a given self  .  question the self.  only entitled to speak .  reproducing a binary.  can't talk about the black experience if you are not black.   reproduce the logic of racism

check the connection between anarchism and intersectionality
interdependence.  anarchafeminism on issues on intersectinaliyt
needs to do its work on other races and genders   in comparison to other trditins  especially because you can't fight one oprresion without anohter .  anarchafeminist you can not fight one without fighting the others  

erronous forms of reification of identities  
perspectives on anarchist theory  number 29 
until all are free black feminism and interlocking oppression 

i am oppressed by the oppression of others
interrelationsal
even if i am in the position of priviledge i am oppressed 

freedom of equals bakunin and the white views
black feminism and intersecitonality and the politics of care in black feminism  
i can see how this can all be connected
performative questioning of my own question 
but then also you enact it as the 
not simply that i have the truth and that i have the models of it

i enact a politics of care  and i care about other traidtions  and so i enter into a dialogue into something that is not a politics 

critique and violence, nelson-maldonado torres 
open upp the boundary of white ignorance
between the interstices  hcr